Flanaess<====>46926<====>Flanaess  The Flanaess is the eastern part of the continent of Oerik, one of the four continents of the fictional world of Oerth in the World of Greyhawk campaign setting for the Dungeons & Dragons fantasy roleplaying game. The Flanaess has been the setting of dozens of adventures published between the 1970s and 2000s and continues to be the central focus of the campaign world. Development of the Flanaess In late 1972, Dave Arneson demonstrated a new type of game to a group of gamers in Lake Geneva, Wisconsin, including game designer Gary Gygax. Gygax agreed to develop a set of rules with Arneson and get the game published; the game eventually became known as Dungeons & Dragons. Gygax designed a set of dungeons underneath the ruins of Castle Greyhawk as a testing ground for new rules, character classes and spells. In those early days, there was no "Flanaess"; the world map of "Oerth" was developed by Gygax as circumstances dictated, the new cities and lands simply drawn over a map of North America. Gygax and his friend Rob Kuntz further developed this campaign setting, and by 1976, the lands within a radius of 50 miles had been mapped in depth, and the lands within a radius of approximately 500 miles were in outline form.  In addition, more distant lands had been roughly sketched out to accommodate various adventures. (For more information about the first days of Gygax's home campaign, see Greyhawk)Following yet more work, in 1978 Gygax agreed to publish his world and decided to redevelop Oerth from scratch. Once he had sketched out the entire planet to his satisfaction,   one hemisphere of Oerth was dominated by a massive continent called Oerik. Gygax decided to concentrate his first efforts on the continent of Oerik and asked TSR's printing house about the maximum size of paper they could handle; the answer was 34" x 22" (86 cm x 56 cm). He found that, using the scale he desired, he could fit only the northeast corner of Oerik on two of the sheets.   This corner of Oerik became known as "the Flanaess", so named in Gygax's mind because of the peaceful people known as the Flannae who had once lived there. Gygax also added many more new regions, countries and cities, bringing the number of political states to 60:  Almor Furyondy Iuz Pomarj Spindrift Isles  Ull  Ahlissa Geoff Keoland Ratik Sterich Urnst (County)  Bandit Kingdoms Gran March Ket  Rel Astra Stonefist Urnst (duchy)  Bissel Great Kingdom Lordship of the Isles Rovers of the Barrens Sunndi Valley of the Mage   Blackmoor  Greyhawk Medegia Scarlet Brotherhood Tenh Veluna  Bone March Highfolk North Province Sea Barons Tiger Nomads Verbobonc  Celene Horned Society Nyrond Sea Princes Tusmit Wild Coast  Dyvers Ice Barbarians Onnwal Shield Lands Ulek (County) Wolf Nomads  Ekbir Idee Pale Snow Barbarians Ulek (duchy) Yeomanry  Frost Barbarians Irongate Perrenland South Province Ulek (principality) Zeif  Needing original placenames for all of the geographical and political places on his map, Gygax sometimes resorted to wordplay based on the names of friends and acquaintances. For instance, Perrenland was named after Jeff Perren, who co-wrote the rules for Chainmail with Gygax; Urnst was a homophone of Ernst (his son Ernie); and Sunndi was a near-homophone of Cindy, another of Gygax's children.   From Gygax's prototype map, Darlene Pekul, a freelance artist in Lake Geneva,  developed a full colour map on a hex grid. Gygax was so pleased with the end result that he quickly switched his home Greyhawk campaign over to the new world he had created. This map formed the basis of the World of Greyhawk when it was published as the 32-page The World of Greyhawk folio in 1980Gygax also developed a thousand-year history for the Flanaess that involved a series of cultural and military invasions: the peaceful Flannae had been pushed out by the warlike Suloise; the Suloise in turn had been pushed out by the noble Oeridians, who set up a Great Kingdom of peace and prosperity. However, by 576 CY (the year Gygax chose for his setting), the Oeridian empire had grown decadent and evil, and many subservient regions were rising up in rebellionIn 1992, after Gygax had been forced out of TSR, the storyline of the Flanaess was moved forward a decade by the From the Ashes boxed set, which dealt with the aftermath of wide-ranging conflict known as The Greyhawk Wars. In 1998, the storyline was advanced even further, to 591 CY, by The Adventure Begins softcover. The massive multiplayer Living Greyhawk campaign, which started in 2001, used The Adventure Begins as a starting point, and advanced the timeline of the campaign ahead one year for each of real-world time. In 2003, it was 593 CY) RacesAs well as being home to a number of demihuman and humanoid races, it is also inhabited by the Suel, Bakluni, Oerid, and Flan subraces of humanity.  The Oerid once inhabited the plains of Central Oerik, but moved into what is now known as Ull starting 1,235 years ago . The Oeridians settled in much of the Flanaess, often conquering and assimilating the Flan natives and Suel settlers, though some lands, such as the Sheldomar Valley and Vale of Luna, were settled more peacefully. GeographyThe Flanaess can be broken down geographically as follows: the Baklunish Basin in the northwest, the Empire of Iuz in the north, the Thillonrian Peninsula in the northeast, the Sea of Dust in the far west, the Sheldomar Valley in the west, old Ferrond and its southern frontier (including the City of Greyhawk) at the center of the Flanaess, old Sulm and the Aerdy frontier to the east, the old Great Kingdom to the far east, and the Amedio Jungle to the southwest. Aerdy Aerdy properly refers to the now-defunct Kingdom of Aerdy. Sometimes "Aerdy" is used in reference to the Oeridian tribe which founded the kingdom, though the proper term for the tribe is "Aerdi" (   ) Mentzer, Frank. "Ay pronunseeAY shun gyd" Dragon #93 (TSR, 1985)  (which is also the adjectival form). "Aerdy" can also be used in reference to the Great Kingdom of Aerdy, the imperial successor state of the Kingdom of Aerdy. Ahlissa The ancient Flan kingdom of Ahlissa was founded over 1,700 years ago by the legendary Queen Ehlissa the Enchanter.  Modern Ahlissa is generally located in the southeastern portion of the Flanaess, and is one of the largest countries on the subcontinent.  Ahlissa is a feudal empire with hereditary rulership, and is currently ruled by His Transcendent Imperial Majesty, Overking Xavener I, Grand Prince of Kalstrand, Crowned Head of House Darmen. AlmorIn 586 CY King Lynwerd I of Nyrond seized the western half of Almor (   ),  placing it under his protection and creating the Almorian Protectorate, and appointing a governor to administer the new province. Amedio Jungle The Amedio Jungle is a large stretch of tropical rainforest located in the southwestern Flanaess, on the continent of Oerik. Lying east of the Hellfurnaces, the Amedio extends over 300 leagues south from its northernmost point at Jeklea Bay.  The border of the Amedio Jungle and the Hellfurnaces was the setting of Dungeon's Shackled City Adventure Path. This adventure detailed the history of the region between Jeklea Bay, the Amedio, and the Hellfurnaces, going back 3000 years to the time of the spellweavers' domination of the area. In that time, a battle between the Abyssal hordes and the forces of good took place around what is now the city of Cauldron. Baklunish BasinThe Baklunish Basin is the northwestern portion of the Flanaess. Consisting chiefly of remnants of the ancient Baklunish Empire, the human peoples of these lands are known as the Baklunish. The most important parts of this region include the nations of Ekbir, Ket, Tusmit, Ull, and Zeif, as well as the Dry Steppes and the Plains of the Paynims. Though not technically part of the Baklunish Basin, the lands of the Tiger and Wolf Nomads are sometimes included, as they are populated by people of Baklunish stockThe basin is bordered to the east by the Crystalmist Mountains, Yatil Mountains, and Barrier Peaks, and to the south by the Sulhaut Mountains. To the north, it is bordered by the Dramidj Ocean and to the west its limits are defined by the Tyurzi Mountains. Bandit Kingdoms The Bandit Kingdoms are generally located in the central portion of the Flanaess. They are governed by various petty dictatorships theoretically owing fealty to Iuz. BisselBissel, properly known as the March of Bissel, is a political state of the FlanaessModern Bissel is generally located in the western-central portion of the Flanaess. It is bordered by the Barrier Peaks to the north and west, by the Dim Forest to the south, and by the Lorridges to the eastAs of 591 CY, the most populous towns are Thornward, and Pellak (pop.  Thornward itself was once the capital of Bissel, but is now a town governed jointly by Bissel, Gran March, Ket, and Veluna (resulting from an agreement known as the Thornward Division)As of 591 CY, the population of Bissel totaled 123,880 persons, over 80% being humans of Oeridian, Suel, and Baklunish descent. Approximately 10% of the population is dwarven, with other humanoid races making up the remainder of the populationThe most popular deities among Bissel's citizens are Heironeous, Zilchus, Fharlanghn, Geshtai, Rao, and IstusThe most widely spoken languages in Bissel include Common, various Baklunish dialects, and DwarvenBissel is a feudal monarchy, and ruled by His Lofty Grace, Larrangin, the Margrave of Bissel, and owing fealty to Gran March and Veluna.  The margrave is chosen by the leadership of the Knights of the WatchIn the Living Greyhawk campaign, Bissel corresponded to New England (the states of Connecticut, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Vermont, New Hampshire, and Maine)The country itself is divided into twenty-six knight-baronies, eight townships, and one capital township, for the national capital of PellakBissel's coat of arms is blazoned thus: Per pale indented gules and argent, over all a tower sableBissel is noted for producing foodstuffs, cloth, gold, and low-quality gems from mining operationsBissel's standard coinage is modeled after Keoland's, and consists of the platinum griffon (pp), gold lion (gp), electrum eagle (ep), silver stag (sp), and copper roc (cp).  Though published in booklet form by Tactical Studies Rules (TSR) in 1975, as the second supplement to D&D (the first being Greyhawk), Blackmoor actually predates Greyhawk as a campaign setting, a fact which Gary Gygax acknowledged in the foreword to the Blackmoor supplement.   Blackmoor as a location within the Greyhawk setting came about both as an inside-joke by Gygax, and as a way for him to acknowledge his fellow writers' creations (Len Lakofka's Lendore Isles occupy a similar position in the world).  Having certain locations exist across the campaign settings of multiple DMs also became a convenient way to explain how player characters such as Mordenkainen (Gygax's character) and Robilar (Rob Kuntz's character) could be adventuring in Blackmoor's City of the Gods at one sitting, while exploring the dungeons of Castle Greyhawk the nextModern Blackmoor is generally located in the northwestern portion of the Flanaess. It is a small and inhospitable realm lying almost completely within the boundaries of the northern reaches of the Cold Marshes.  The Burneal Forest forms a western boundary of sorts, while the Land of Black Ice does the same to the northAs of 591 CY, the population of Blackmoor totaled 110,000 persons.  Almost 40% of these inhabitants are humans of predominantly Flan and Oeridian stock, although some Suel and Baklunish can be found as well.  Another 20% comprise orcish tribes that roam the region (some under the control of the Egg of Coot, some not).  A slightly smaller percentage of halflings is also present, while elves, gnomes, half-orcs, half-elves, and other races make up the remainder of the population in increasingly smaller percentagesAs of 591 CY, the most populous town is Dantredun (pop. 700) on the edge of the Burneal.  Blackmoor Town, the original capital of the archbarony, was conquered and destroyed in 541 CY by the "Egg of Coot", a mysterious being with a significant amount of magical power at his disposal.  The "town" that serves as the Egg's home contains a number of automata (some reports place the number as high as 200), though very few living beings (if any) reside thereThe actual structure of Blackmoor's government is unknown.  His Luminous Preponderancy, Archbaron Bestmo of Blackmoor claims the title of "archbaron", and with it, rule over the ten underbaronies of the region.  However, Teuod Fent, formerly of the Bandit Kingdoms, has claimed Ramshorn Castle as his own, and with it the title of "baron".  Nonhuman tribes also roam the area, though their allegiances are usually only to themselves.  The national capital is Dantredun (the seat of Bestmo's power). Bone MarchThe Bone March is a political state of the Flanaess. The Bone March is generally located in the eastern portion of the Flanaess. It rests in the narrow strip of land bounded by the Rakers in the west and the Teesar Torrent in the east, and curving around to encompass Johnsport on the coast of the Solnor Ocean. The cool, rocky farmland of the Bone March is relatively poor and never supported a dense population or large cities. Its farmlands are now desolate wildernessAs of 591 CY, the population of Bone March totaled 310,000 persons, though only a large minority are human (mainly Oeridian stock, but some Suel and Flan as well).  About 20% of the population are orcs, and nearly the same number are halflings; gnomes, Elves, half-orcs, half-elves, and dwarves make up decreasing numbers of the remaining citizensAs of 591 CY, the most populous towns are Knurl (13,500), Spinecastle (pop. 6,300(?)), and Johnsport (pop. The numbers above do not take into account the large number of other uncounted goblins, gnolls, etcThe most popular deities among Bone March's inhabitants are Hextor, the Oeridian agricultural gods, Erythnul, Kord, the orc pantheon, and BeltarThe most widely spoken languages in Bone March include Common, Old Oeridian, Orc, Halfling, Gnomish, and Elven.  Goblin, Gnoll, and other nonhuman languages are spoken as well, due to the large numbers of those races present in the landBone March was formerly a feudal marchland of the Great Kingdom, and ruled by His Nobility, Clement, the Marquis of Bone March; since 563 CY, it has been controlled by a conclave of nonhuman chiefs. The national capital is Spinecastle. Bone March's coat of arms is blazoned thus: Gules, three shin-bones, two in saltire, surmounted by one in pale, argentBone March is noted for producing silver and low- to average-quality gems. Bone March's coinage is based on Aerdy's standard, and consists of the platinum orb (pp), gold ivid (gp), electrum noble (ep), silver penny (sp), and copper common (cp). The World of Greyhawk (TSR, 1980)Holian, Gary, Erik Mona, Sean K Reynolds, and Frederick Weining. Living Greyhawk Gazetteer (Wizards of the Coast, 2000) Bright LandsThe Bright Lands, properly known as the Empire of the Bright Lands, is a dictatorial political state of the FlanaessThe boundaries of the Bright Lands are contained entirely within the bounds of the Bright Desert.  The Abbor Alz form the northern and eastern borders, while the Woolly Bay and the Sea of Gearnat form natural boundaries to the country's west and southAs of 591 CY, the population of the Bright Lands totaled 26,500 persons, the vast majority (almost 80%) being humans of mainly Flan descent. Dwarves account for the next largest group, with the remainder of the population (barely 1%) consisting of mostly centaursThere is no state sponsored religion within the country. Among the Flan tribesmen, worship of Beory, Obad-Hai, and Pelor is most common. Geshtai and Istus are most popular with the few Paynim in the region, while a few scattered goblin tribes worship Maglubiyet and other deities of the goblin pantheonThe most widely spoken languages in the Bright Lands are Flan and Ancient Suloise (by the native tribesmen), and various Baklunish dialects (by the Paynims)The Empire of the Bright Lands is a dictatorship with Rary of Ket as the head of state.  The realm functions as a minor city-state administered from Rary's tower in the Brass Hills.  Rary maintains his power with the assistance of Robilar, a powerful warrior who serves as commander of Rary's forces in the EmpireThe state's coat of arms is blazoned thus: Gules, a gauntlet proper gripping a crescent or; on a chief azure three mullets argentThe Bright Lands does not currently produce its own coinage. CeleneCelene, properly known as the Faerie Kingdom of Celene, is a political state, and the most prominent elven nation, of the FlanaessCelene is bordered by the Kron Hills to the north, the Lortmil Mountains to the west and southwest, and the Jewel River to the east and southeast. It is a hereditary feudal monarchy ruled by a grey elven king or queen. The current monarch is Her Fey Majesty, Queen Yolande, Perfect Flower of Celene, Lady Rhalta of All Elvenkind. Yolande has been queen since 361 CY, when the elven princes of the realm assembled to choose a leader to unite the elves against expansionist KeolandThe national capital is EnstadCelene's coat of arms is blazoned thus: Purpure, a tree proper. County of Ulek The modern County of Ulek is generally located in the southwestern portion of the Flanaess, and is considered part of the Sheldomar Valley region. It is bordered by the Lortmil Mountains to the north and east, by the Old River to the east and south, and by the Kewl River to the West.  As of 591 CY, the most populous towns are Jurnre (pop. 10,900), and Courwood (pop. 7,800)As of 591 CY, the population of the County of Ulek totaled 370,000 persons, the majority (almost 80%) being humans of Oeridian, Flan, and Suel descent. Gnomes are the next most populous group (8%), followed by halflings (6%, predominantly of the lightfoot variety), with the remainder being a mix of elves, dwarves, half-elves, and half-orcs. County of UrnstThe County of Urnst is situated on the east coast of the Nyr Dyv, and bordered by the Duchy of Urnst to the southwest, The Kingdom of Nyrond to the south and east, and the Bandit Kingdoms to the north. The County of Urnst's capital is Radigast City. The state's coat of arms is blazoned thus: Vert, a swan argent. Duchy of UrnstThe Duchy of Urnst, properly known as the Duchy Palatine of Urnst, is a political state of the FlanaessAs of 591 CY, the most populous towns are Leukish (pop. 7,550), and Goldplain (pop. 6,700)As of 591 CY, the population of the Duchy of Urnst totaled 751,850 persons, the vast majority (almost 80%) being humans of mainly Suel descent. Elves, gnomes, halflings, dwarves, half-elves, and half-orcs make up the remainder of the populationThe most popular deities among the Duchy's citizens are Saint Cuthbert (mainly among residents of rural regions), Pelor, the halfling pantheon, and LydiaThe most widely spoken languages in the Duchy of Urnst include Common, Halfling, and ElvenThe Duchy of Urnst is an independent feudal monarchy (theoretically owing fealty to the old Great Kingdom) with hereditary rulership currently held by His Most Lordly Grace Karll Lorinar, the Duke of Urnst, Warden of the Abbor-Alz.  The Honorable Chamber is a contingent of noble and high-born Suel that serves as the Duke's advisors. The national capital is LeukishThe Duchy of Urnst's coat of arms is blazoned thus: Vert, a brown bear rampant properThe Duchy of Urnst is noted for producing a variety of foodstuffs, and mining operations produce silver, electrum, gold, platinum, and gemstones of all qualitiesThe Duchy's standard coinage is based on Aerdy's system and consists of the platinum sterling duke (pp), gold gold duke (gp), electrum bright (ep), silver shield (sp), and copper common (cp). Empire of IuzThe Empire of Iuz is an empire ruled by the demigod IuzThe Empire of Iuz is classified by the Living Greyhawk Gazetteer as an "imperial theocratic dictatorship" Though Iuz holds all power, his rule is inconsistent. Iuz's priesthood and other spellcasters manage the affairs of the empire in his name. Iuz and his servants have more control over some regions of the empire than othersThe capital of the empire is the city of Dorakaa. Administrative divisionsThe Empire of Iuz consists of five loosely defined political regions, though they are not considered actual provinces. Land of IuzAlso called the Homeland of Iuz, this region lies mainly between the Dulsi and Opicim Rivers, south of the Cold Marshes, and north of Whyestil Lake. Bandit LandsOnce referred to as the Bandit Kingdoms, this region lies west of the Zumker and Artonsamay Rivers, east of the Ritensa River, and is bounded in part by the Fellreev Forest and Bluff Hills. This region is actually made up of a number of warlord fiefs. Barren LandsThese grasslands south of the Icy Sea and the Wastes are also known as the Barrens, the Barren Plains, or the Northern Barrens. North of the Bandit Lands, the Barrens' eastern border is formed by the Forlorn Forest, western Griff Mountains, and the Bluff Hills. Their western border is formed by the Cold Marshes and Opicim River. Once ruled by the nomadic Flan tribes known as the Rovers of the Barrens, these people are but a shadow of their former glory. Horned LandsThis region is bound by Whyestil Lake, the Veng and Ritensa Rivers, and the Fellreev Forest. These lands were for a time ruled by the Horned Society, before Iuz once again took control during the Greyhawk Wars. Shield LandsBordered by the Ritensa river, Nyr Dyv, and Rift Barrens, this land was ruled before the Greyhawk Wars by the chivalrous order known as the Knights of Holy Shielding. Though a western portion of the Shield Lands were reclaimed in the Great Northern Crusade of 586-588, the majority of the area is still under Iuz's control. FerrondFerrond most often refers to the former Great Kingdom province known as the Viceroyalty of Ferrond, or the general region where its successor states now lieThe Viceroyalty of Ferrond was a vassal state of the Great Kingdom of Aerdy, ruled by a viceroy in the name of the Overking. The capital of the Viceroyalty was the city of DyversThe Viceroyalty of Ferrond consisted of the modern-day states of Furyondy (Furyon), Highfolk, Perrenland (the Quaglands), the Shield Lands, Veluna (Voll), and the hilly regions northeast of the Vesve Forest, known then as part of the Northern Reaches. Free City of Greyhawk  Frost BarbariansThe Frost Barbarians, properly known as the Kingdom of Fruztii, is a political state of the Flanaess. The people themselves are sometimes referred to as simply the Fruztii.  The lands of the Frost Barbarians are located in the far northeastern portion of the Flanaess, on what is known as the Thillonrian Peninsula. They occupy the coastal plains between the Griff and Corusk Mountains and the Grendep Bay. Their lands are separated from those of the Snow Barbarians by the Spikey Forest, while the Timberway Forest forms their southern border against Ratik.  As of 591 CY, the most populous towns are Krakenheim (pop.  The most popular deities among the Frost Barbarians are Kord, Llerg, Norebo, Xerbo, Vatun, and SyrulThe Frost Barbarians maintain a hereditary feudal monarchy, currently ruled by His Most Warlike Majesty, King Hundgred Rälffson of the Fruztii.  The Frost Barbarians are also party to a political alliance with Ratik, known as the Northern Alliance.  The Frost Barbarians' coat of arms is blazoned thus: Ermine, a roundel azure. FuryondyFuryondy, properly known as the Kingdom of Furyondy, is a feudal kingdom of the Flanaess, and a successor state of Ferrond.  The Kingdom of Furyondy is a hereditary feudal monarchy. The power of the kingship is limited by the Noble Council. Since 288 CY, the nation's capital has been Chendl.  Modern Furyondy is bordered by the Nyr Dyv to the east; by the Veng River, Whyestil Lake, and the Vesve Forest to the north; and by the Velverdyva River to the south and west.  The most widely spoken languages in Furyondy include Common, Velondi, Elvish, and HalflingIn the Living Greyhawk campaign, Furyondy corresponds to the state of Michigan.  GeoffGeoff was first described in 1983 in the World of Greyhawk campaign setting, where Geoff is properly known as the Grand Duchy of Geoff, and is a ducal political state of the fictional continent called the Flanaess. As a result, thousands of role-players enjoyed adventures and other gaming events held in Geoff. Gran MarchThe modern Gran March is generally located in the western-central portion of the Flanaess, and is considered part of the Sheldomar Valley region. It is bordered by Bissel to the north, the Lortmil Mountains to the north and northeast, the Lort River to the east, Sheldomar River and the Rushmoors to the south, and the Realstream River to the west. As of 591 CY, the most populous towns are Hookhill (pop. 7,500), and Shiboleth (pop. 5,900)As of 591 CY, the population of Gran March totaled 254,600 persons, the vast majority (almost 80%) being humans of mainly Suel and Oeridian descent. Cuthbert, Pholtus, Fharlanghn, Zilchus, the Oeridian agricultural gods, Phyton, and Obad-HaiThe most widely spoken languages in Gran March include Common, Keolandish, Elven, and DwarvenGran March is a feudal monarchy, ruled by His Most Resolute Magnitude, Magnus Vrianian, Commandant of Gran March; the commandant is chosen by a vote of nobles and knights every five years.  The current state owes minor fealty to Keoland, and oversees the current government in Bissel.  The government and nobles are strongly militarily oriented, with many connections to the Knights of the Watch. The national capital is HookhillGran March's coat of arms is blazoned thus: Argent; on a chief party per pale gules and azure, in dexter a lion rampant sable, in sinister a sword per bend sinister of the secondGran March is noted for producing a variety of foodstuffs, cloth, copper, and high-quality gemsGran March's standard coinage is based on Keoland's coinage and consists of the platinum griffon (pp), gold lion (gp), electrum eagle (ep), silver white owl (sp), and copper heron (cp)The Gran March maintains its military through universal male service.  All males are conscripted at the age of fifteen, while female service is still optional.  The standing army can be reinforced by a number of specialist militia companies, including archers, cavalry, and pikemenGran March is also a playable region in the RPGA's Living Greyhawk campaign. Players who join the RPGA can create characters (PCs) from Gran March and advance in level as they explore the region through adventures ordered from the RPGA for home play or at gaming conventions. Great Kingdom  Highfolk  Ice Barbarians  KeolandKeoland, properly known as the Kingdom of Keoland, is one of the oldest political states in the Flanaess. The state was founded -342 CY (303 OR via a union of the Suel houses of Rhola and Neheli, and minor Oeridian nobles which had also settled in the Sheldomar ValleyBordered by the Javan River to the west, the Azure Sea to the south, the Sheldomar River to the east, and the Rushmoors to the north, Keoland is the largest nation in the Sheldomar Valley. The climate is normally temperate year-roundAs of 591 CY, the population of Keoland totaled 1,800,000 persons, the vast majority being humans of chiefly Suel and Oeridian stock. Elves, gnomes, halflings, and dwarves, make up perhaps 20% of the total populationThe most widely spoken languages in Keoland are Common, Keoish, Elvish, Gnomish, and HalflingThe Kingdom of Keoland is a feudal monarchy. Though the monarch rules for life, succession is determined by the Noble Council of Niole Dra. The result is that the crown usually passes between two or more noble houses of the land. The national capital is Niole Dra. The office of the king is known as the Throne of the Lion in Keoland. In the Living Greyhawk campaign, in late 598 CY King Skotti was killed by an assassin after a battle for the fate of KeolandThe Council of Niole Dra, often called the Court of the Land, is made up of major nobility and heads of favored guilds and societies of Keoland. Numbering approximately 100 persons, the Council deals with questions of succession, levies provincial taxes, and ratifies any changes to the kingdom's founding charterKeoland's coat of arms is blazoned thus: Gules, a lion rampant sableKeoland's standard coinage consists of the platinum griffon (pp), gold lion (gp), electrum eagle (ep), silver hawk (sp), and copper sparrow (cp)In addition to its well-worn roads, Keoland boasts much river traffic along the Javan and Sheldomar. The port city of Gradsul is the largest on the Azure SeaThe royal navy, based at Gradsul, is led by the duke of that province, Luschan VII, who acts as the Lord High Admiral of KeolandKeoland is also protected by the independent Knights of the Watch and the Knights of DispatchSimon Garfield commented that Keoland "has a distinctly aristocratic flavor with its many baronies, duchies and earldoms".  KetBecause Ket lies in the only gap in the north-south spine of mountains that divides the eastern Flanaess from the western Baklunish Basin, it is a nexus of important trade routes, a nation of caravans and merchants where peoples and cultures from all parts of the Flanaess mix and mingle. Various editions of material published about this region between 1980 and 2000 have changed its character from a self-serving state sometimes at odds with its neighbors to an aggressive and evil military state, and back again. In this edition, Gygax portrayed Ket as a belligerent nation often at odds with its neighbors. Since Ket lay between Baklunish lands to the east and Oeridian lands to the west, it was considered a buffer state and a crossroads of trade and culture; its people were a mix of human races (although Baklunish culture predominated), and the court and military showed strong influences from both east and west. Other than trade, its resources were silver and gems. Militarily, Ket had been both the victim of invasion and an aggressor seeking new territory. Much of southern Ket was covered by the Bramblewood, a vast primeval forest that had one main road "and possibly some secondary tracks". Ket lay on a high plateau, and two major rivers, the Tuflik and the Fals, originated within Ket before flowing off the plateau to the north and south respectively. Ket's coat of arms in the 1980 edition was blazoned thus: Gules, a scimitar in pale argent, the point to the base. Sea of Death: Gygax Delineates His Vision of Ket (1987)Just prior to being forced out of TSR in 1985, Gygax had authored two Gord the Rogue novels. In 1987, he wrote the third book of the series, Sea of Death. The second chapter is set in Ket, and it highlighted the Ket that Gygax had originally envisioned: The capital, Lopolla is crowded, noisy, grimy, decadent and dangerous. The only people living in the empty countryside are Bedouin-like nomadic tribes. The Greyhawk Wars: Ket takes center stage (1990)In 1990, the Greyhawk Wars boxed set advanced the Greyhawk timeline to 585 CY, and described a war that had recently engulfed the Flanaess. As described in the Greyhawk Wars game, Ketite horsemen had invaded and conquered neighbouring Bissel, and Ket was considered Evil. Ket was again merely the belligerent state, rather than being Evil. Its evil beygraf was assassinated, and a new beygraf seized power just in time to prevent an attack on Ket's forces in Bissel by Gran March. Ket's forces were then voluntarily withdrawn from Bissel. Living Greyhawk Campaign (2001–2008)In 2001, in the Living Greyhawk Gazetteer, Ket's description and details of its history and society were greatly expanded:  The racial makeup of the population, which in Gygax's editions had been "mainly human", was divided into "Human 96%, Dwarf 2%, Halfling 1%, Other 1%" This edition completely replaced Gygax's concept of a country of nomadic tribes with a quiet and peaceful rural countryside: "The northern and western portion of Ket are more civilized country, with tilled fields and many villages" The greatly expanded history of Ket explained in detail historical details that had only been mentioned briefly in previous editions: Ket began as a province of Zeif, was invaded by a group of nomads called "The Brazen Horde", was subsequently invaded by Keoland, who constructed the Irafa Road through the Bramblewood Forest. The Ketite resistance movement eventually drove the armies of Keoland out of the country and won Ketite independence from Zeif. This was also the time when the True Faith (now linked to Al'Akbar) became the predominant religion in both the military and government.  In the run-up to the start of the Living Greyhawk campaign, Ket was assigned to all of Eastern Canada except Quebec (specifically the provinces of Manitoba, Ontario, Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island and Newfoundland and Labrador) However, the volunteers fleshing out Ket for the campaign, instead of extrapolating the material that had been published by WotC over the past three years, created a pseudo-Persian feudal theocracy with unforgiving laws and harsh punishments, where the merciless and literal interpretation of statutes and decrees outweighed any considerations of justice or mercyDuring the Living Greyhawk campaign, several major storylines emerged:  CY 594: Ket invaded Tusmit, but both armies were ambushed by a powerful rebel force, and ultimately had to ally in order to defeat the rebels. CY 595: As Ket withdrew from joint control of Thornward, mechanical spiders invaded the country. CY 597: The lost Cup & Talisman of Al'Akbar were found in Ekbir, and Ket invaded in order to recover them. Bissel invaded Ket in turn and burned Lopolla to the ground, exacting revenge for their humiliating defeat during the Greyhawk Wars. CY 598: In Ekbir, as the Ketite army faced off against the army of Ekbir, Al'Akbar appeared, called everyone dogmatic fools, and destroyed the Cup and Talisman so they could never be used to foment war again. With nothing to show for their long journey, the Ket army headed home to rebuild Lopolla.   Land of Black IceThe Land of Black Ice is an arctic wasteland located in the northwestern Flanaess, north of the Burneal Forest and Blackmoor, east of the Drawmidj Ocean, and west of the Icy Sea. The land gets its name from the vast sheet of blue-black ice that covers it as far as the eye can seeThe only humans living near the area are the Baklunish Guryik folk on the Drawmidj coast, and the Suloise Zeai, or Sea Barbarians, who dwell on a section of Icy Sea coastline known as the Tusking Strand. Within the Land of Black Ice proper are said to dwell all manner of horrid arctic monsters, so few humans enter the region. Tales are told of wights, frost men, evil spirits, black-skinned trolls, and blue-furred bugbears inhabiting the wastelandThe fabled City of the Gods is said to lie just outside the Land of Black Ice, near Blackmoor. Those few who have entered the city and escaped alive, among them Mordenkainen and Sir Robilar, tell tales of an artificially warm city of tall iron buildings, powerful magic, and strange automatonsLegends tell of another region beyond the ice, a land of lush jungles and an unmoving sun. Such legends give some reason to believe that the Oerth is hollow, containing another world within the inside of the globe, to which entry is gained via great openings in the poles. NyrondNyrond, or more properly the Kingdom of Nyrond, refers to one of the largest good-aligned states in the FlanaessIn 356 CY, the opportunist junior branch of the Aerdy Celestial House of Rax-Nyrond declared independence from the Overking of the Great Kingdom. Weakened by warfare against the likes of Ferrond, Perrenland, and Tenh, the scions of House Rax nonetheless amassed a large retribution-minded army to teach the upstart "kingdom" a lesson. At this moment, a coalition of Fruztii, Schnai and mercenary barbarians invaded North Province, distracting the Overking's army and allowing Nyrond critical time to entrench and train its military to repulse Aerdy military actions. For the next two centuries relations between the two states varied from open war to preparing for warIn 584 CY, during the Greyhawk Wars, Nyrond halted an invasion by the Great Kingdom after Ivid V's forces devastated Almor. Thereafter the Great Kingdom fell apart in magical disaster and civil war. Nyrond was in nearly as bad shape. After King Archbold III suffered a poison-induced stroke at the hands of his younger son in the fall of 585 CY, said son, Prince Sewarndt attempted to seize power. Sewarndt's coup was thwarted by his older brother, Crown Prince Lynwerd,  who took the throne after Archbold abdicated in Fireseek of 586 CY, possibly the most popular decision of his time as rulerUnder Lynwerd, Nyrond has been slowly recovering, though times are good only by comparison to Archbold times. Nyrond in the Living Greyhawk campaignIn the Living Greyhawk campaign, the following events took place in Nyrond: In early 595 CY another major revolt was successfully led by Sewarndt. He captured the capital city with the assistance of supernatural allies, and in the course of the assault he committed patricide. In autumn 595 CY, several campaigns around the country, led by Lynwerd's supporters and loyal nobles, succeeded in recapturing nearly all major provinces and cities. The reconquest ended in Sewarndt's death at the hands of his brother at the very gates of the Royal Palace in Rel MordLynwerd is married to Queen Xenia Sallavarian of the Duchy of Urnst. PaleAt the height of the Great Kingdom, the Head of the Church of Pholtus was given the title of Holy Censor, which brought duties of oversight of the court system. Later Overkings turned against the church and removed this title, prompting many Pholtus worshippers to begin feeling persecuted and flee to the area which now is the Pale. Fighting with the early settlers was Ceril the Relentless, who founded the Council of the Nine. In 342 CY, the first Theocrat of the Pale was chosen by the Council, though the land remained theoretically under Great Kingdom rule. But in 356 CY, Nyrond declared independence, claiming the Pale, which then tried to seize its own independence, but failed, remaining under Nyrondian ruleIn 450 CY, the leaders of the cult of Pholtus convinced the King of Nyrond to grant them independence in return for promises of mutual aid and assistance. It thus remained neutral in the Greyhawk Wars. Plains of the PaynimsThe Plains of the Paynims, also known as the Paynims, is a political state and may also refer to the tribes of nomadic horsemen who live there. The plains are situated in the Baklunish Basin region of the Flanaess, west of Ket and south of Zeif. The native folk are Baklunish with mixed racial characteristics absorbed from subjugated travelers or settled merchants. There is no central authority; the government consists mainly of tribal khans and amirs ruled by progressively more powerful nobles (orakhans, ilkhans, or shahs) and royalty (padishahs, tarkhans, or kha-khans). There is great variation in governments between nomadic tribes. The coat of arms is blazoned thus: Gules, a scimitar per bend sinister or, in dexter chief a cross moline in saltire of the last. PomarjThe Pomarj can refer either to a large peninsula located in the central Flanaess, or to the Orcish Empire of the Pomarj, located in the same regionBefore the Great Migrations, the Pomarj was mainly a desolate region populated by primitive Flan tribespeople who revered equally primitive deities of earth and sky.  Eventually, small numbers of outcast Suel settled the region. The region received little notice from the rest of the world for centuries, remaining largely isolatedIn 295 CY, King Tavish I of Keoland and the Prince of Ulek, seeking to exploit the Pomarj's mineral wealth, raised an army to invade and subjugate the region, an endeavor which was accomplished in the span of a few years.  The Pomarj was divided up into roughly a dozen small baronies, which were awarded to favored families of the Keoish throne.  These subfiefs were administered by and under the protection of the Principality of Ulek. Over the next few decades, mining brought great wealth to these petty barons.  In 305 CY, the town of Highport was constructed on the north coast to share these riches with the rest of the FlanaessIn 461 CY, the Principality of Ulek had withdrawn from Keoland to gain palatinate status. The barons of the Pomarj at this time, being subjects of the Prince of Ulek, had no voice in the Council of Niole Dra. Dissatisfied with their position, the Pomarj barons broke with the Principality of Ulek in 463, declaring their own independence. The barons ejected the Prince's dwarven garrisons and declared Highport their capital. Despite this apparent unity, however, each baron ruled his state independently, and feuds were common. Many barons assigned themselves grandiose titles, such as archbaron, duke, or prince. The baron of Suderham, even went so far as to dub himself "King of the Drachensgrabs"In 498 CY, the Hateful Wars began as an alliance between Celene and the Ulek States, who sought to drive the orcs, goblins, and other evil humanoids from Lortmil Mountains. The Prince of Ulek invited the former barons of the Pomarj to join the alliance, but the lords of the Pomarj refused, fearing reabsorption into the Principality and seeing little reason to involve themselves in what they viewed as chiefly a conflict between non-humans. By 510 CY, the Hateful Wars were over, but this conflict would have great repercussions for the PomarjIn 513 CY, hordes of surviving orcs, goblins, and other evil creatures from the Lortmils, having few places to hide from their elven and dwarven foes, fled to the Pomarj, emerging from the Suss and falling upon Highport in a destructive rage. In a matter of months, all of the other former baronies, save the hidden city of Suderham, also fell to the humanoid invadersOver the next few decades, the Pomarj became essentially a backwater filled with orcs, goblinoids, and other evil creatures, as well as a haven for human bandits, pirates, slavers, and other criminals. Various humanoid tribes carved out territories. Any good humans left lived as slaves, or else waged a losing guerrilla war against the invadersBy 574 CY, the last king of Suderham was assassinated by the Slave Lords, who turned the town into their base of operations. The Slave Lords managed to bring much of the Pomarj under their control, but by 580 CY their power was brokenDuring the Greyhawk Wars of 582-584 CY, a powerful orc chieftain named Turrosh Mak united the Nedla and other humanoid tribes of the Pomarj, and invaded the surrounding lands, bringing much of the Wild Coast and the Principality of Ulek under his control. Mak named his "empire where none has stood" the Orcish Empire of the Pomarj.  Though much of the land west of the Jewel was reclaimed by the Principality of Ulek in 586 CY, Mak continues to hold power in the region, and his empire shows no signs of declineThe Pomarj proper is a peninsula dividing the Azure Sea from the Sea of Gearnat. It is bordered by the Jewel River to the west, the Suss Forest and Woolly Bay to the north, with the Straights of Gearnat to the east and the Azure to the south. The borders of the Empire are slightly larger, extending north along the Wild Coast, stopping only a few leagues south of Safeton. The Empire's western border once stretched as far as the foothills of the Lortmil Mountains, but much of this land has since been reclaimed by the Principality of UlekThe peninsula is dominated by the Drachensgrabs, a range of hills which ascend to the height of mountains at their highest point. The soil of the land is poor, making cultivation of crops difficultArtifact of Evil by Gary Gygax describes "the fair shores of the Pomarj, where snow never fell" [page 344]As of 591 CY, the population of the Pomarj was estimated at 476,000 persons, with 43% being orcs, 28% humans (mainly of Suel and Oeridian ancestry), 15% goblin, 10% hobgoblin, and 4% of other racesThe orcish pantheon, led by Gruumsh, is heavily favored in the Pomarj, as are Beltar, Syrul, and the goblin pantheon, led by MaglubiyetThe most widely spoken languages in the Pomarj are Orcish, Common, and GoblinThe Orcish Empire of the Pomarj is a dictatorship which oversees various humanoid tribal leaders. The dictator's power is enforced by his large personal army made up of warriors from his own orcish tribe. The national capital is StoneheimThe Orcish Empire of the Pomarj is made up of numerous territories, the vast majority ruled by non-human tribal leadersAs of 591 CY, the Pomarj's chief of state is His Most Ferocious Majesty, the Despot Turrosh Mak, who has held power since the Greyhawk WarsThe Pomarj's coat of arms is blazoned thus: Argent, a medusa's head caboshed gules. This device was traditionally used by the goblins of the Pomarj, before being adopted by Turrosh Mak's government. In addition to the state's official heraldry, several of the humanoid tribes have traditionally carried their own devices:  Hobgoblins: Gules, a demon's skull armed argent Orcs: Sable, a human skull argent  The Pomarj's resources include silver, electrum, gold, gems, and slavesThe Pomarj has no standard national coinage, but a number of official and unofficial currencies do exist, minted by most cities, towns, and powerful non-human tribes. Note that some of these currencies are out of dateThe roads of the Pomarj are not well-maintained, which is not surprising for a nation ruled by orcs.  The land does boast a few ports however, including Highport and BlueThe Pomarj can field large numbers of non-human troops, and many are trained at the capital city of Stoneheim. The Pomarj has no navy to speak of, though a number of pirates and mercenaries are employed to harry the shipping lanes of the Sea of Gearnat and the Azure Sea. It is rumored that the Pomarj can also call upon the Scarlet Brotherhood for aid. Rovers of the Barrens The Rovers of the Barrens, also known as the Barrens, and properly known as Arapahi (translated as "People of the Plentiful Huntinglands"), is a political state of the Flanaess. The name also applies to the tribes of nomadic horsemen who dwell within these lands. Scarlet Brotherhood The Scarlet Brotherhood most often refers to the Great and Hidden Empire of the Scarlet Brotherhood, a nation located on the Tilvanot Peninsula in the southeastern Flanaess, though it can also refer to the secretive organization which rules that land.  Sea of DustThe Sea of Dust is a vast desert of ash and dust bound by a number of mountain ranges, including the Sulhauts to the north, the Hellfurnaces to the east, and a spur of the Tyurzi Mountains to the southThe Sea of Dust was first described in print in Quag Keep by Andre Norton, who wrote the book with Gary Gygax giving her information on the Greyhawk setting in which it was set.  It was described more formally and familiarly in The World of Greyhawk folio (1980) with the description repeated in the World of Greyhawk Fantasy Game Setting a few years later.  There has been a little more information published since then in the Living Greyhawk Gazetteer,  and elsewhere. The detail about thri-kreen packs was mentioned in Thri-Kreen of Athas, which had a short section on the thri-kreen of Oerth. The Sea of Dust is dominated by powdery gray ash immediately west of the Hellfurnaces. More ash is added every year. It becomes less ash-clogged toward the Sulhauts, where ruined fortifications and walled cities of the Suloise can still be seen. These ruined buildings have the characteristic high-angled look still favored by Suel-descended peoples in places such as the Lendore Isles and the Sea PrincesThe central region of the Sea of Dust is the most alien. Rather than gray ash, the substance of the Sea is a white, caustic powder that blows around and causes those who do not protect their mouths and noses with damp cloths to cough blood. Mixed with water, it forms a strong lye. The light reflecting off the white dunes will blind those who do not protect their eyes with slitted visors or masks. Glassy depressions in the central Sea are said to correspond to former cities of the SuelIn the southwest of the Sea of Dust there is a small amount of rainfall, and here various groups of nomads are able to survive. The dust of this region is dry soil rather than an alien alkaline material or ash, and it is extraordinarily productive for a time after the occasional rainThe majority of the Sea of Dust is without water on the surface and has no plant life on the surface. In areas where the dust or ash lies thinner above the more stable earth the occasional vampire cactus is able to survive; their seeds were brought to the area by migrating birds. Thus, certain creatures live in tunnels beneath the dust, including boring beetles, bulettes, giant centipedes, meenlocks, derro, horgar, jermlaines, osquips, purple worms, giant rats, myconids, snyads, and ankhegsIn the foothills of the Hellfurnaces, firenewts and fire lizards hunt. In the same region a short, stocky human people cover their bodies with a foul-smelling wax in order to protect themselves from caustic dust and burning sun. This matches the description of the Hek people from the adventure All That GlittersGiant snakes and arachnids of various kinds can also be found in the desertThe majority of the derro race still dwells beneath the Sea of Dust, having survived the Rain of Colorless Fire thanks to the protection of hundreds of feet of earth. A major community of them lives in the Forgotten CitySome of the nomads are of Suel descent, but most are a tall, slender, curly-haired people with blue-black skin and slanted eyes with origins to the south. They are rich in gold and gems looted from the ruined cities of the SuelStories are told of packs of thri-kreen roaming the wastes of the Sea of DustThe nomads move frequently between wells, as they are prone to dry up or grow salty when overusedThe dustlakes, or Ktosor-hep as the local nomads call them, are pools of dust anywhere between half a mile and six miles across that have been made magical by contact with the buried towns and cities of the Suel. While the wavelike dunes of the Sea of Dust do resemble the form of a watery sea, the dustlakes are completely liquid, able to support boats, swimmers, and divers just as water does. Unlike water, they are somewhat breathable for those wearing fine cloth masks, as the fluid somehow permits the passage of air between the grains of dust. The Rain of Colorless Fire was sent by the Baklunish Empire to the north, in retaliation for the Invoked Devastation which destroyed all but the remnants of that empire. Sheldomar ValleyThe Sheldomar Valley refers to the large swath of fertile land in southwestern Flanaess, bordered by the Barrier Peaks to the north, Crystalmists and Hellfurnaces to the west, Azure Sea to the south and the Lortmils to the east. The valley is named after the Sheldomar River, which runs through a good portion of its lengthA number of nations make up the Sheldomar Valley, the largest being the Kingdom of Keoland. Other notable realms include Bissel, Geoff, the Gran March, the Hold of the Sea Princes, the Ulek States, the Valley of the Mage and the YeomanryThe Sheldomar Valley was mentioned by Stephen Colbert on the Colbert Report as a location travelled to by his player character, Farynieth.  link}}    Holian, Gary, Erik Mona, Sean K Reynolds, and Frederick Weining.  Star CairnsThe Star Cairns are a series of stone warrens that were used in antiquity by Suloise mages as magical research centers. The Star Cairns is also the name of a 1998 adventure module in which players can explore the site. LocationThe Star Cairns are located to the southeast of the Free City of Greyhawk in the foothills of the Abbor-Alz. The cairns were originally set in a "V" pointing south with the apex near the town of Ul Bakak on the border of the Bright Desert. However, due to the magical disruptions of the cataclysm that brought an end to their use, the southernmost cairn is not apparent much of the time, as it is shifting between planes. The area was chosen by the Suloise mages due to a confluence of ley lines that enhanced the magic properties of the area, easing their research. HistoryThe Star Cairns were the brainchild of a court mage of the Great Kingdom, Murtaree, who was given a copy of Kevelli Mauk's Tome of the Scarlet Sign, written just prior to the Rain of Colorless Fire that eradicated the Suel Imperium, and which served as the manifesto for the Scarlet Brotherhood. Murtaree came across his copy of the book in 167 CYThe book affected Murtaree immensely, and inspired him to attempt his own revenge on the Baklunish people, and he soon gathered other Suel who were of a similar disposition, and took them to the Abbor-Alz, where they built five underground bunkers across the landscape in an area that was rich in magical energy. There the mages conducted research and began the construction of a major magical weapon. Murtaree attempted, and failed to become a lich about this time and died in 174 CYThe Cairns were devastated and abandoned in 198 CY, as a meteor strike summoned from the heavens by Lyzandred hit the Abbor-Alz, disrupting careful experiments in one cairn, ripping it from the Prime Material Plane (to return only sporadically). The surviving mages left the area, many leaving for the Great KingdomSince then, the four remaining cairns have been employed by different groups of beings for different purposes. In particular, the Armor Research Cairn has been used in the past by the wealthy of Greyhawk and Hardby as a communal tomb, although the practice has by and large ceasedThe cairns are also the resting place of the components of an artifact known as the Doomheart, a weapon of great power that has the capability of casting a cone that disintegrates all in its path (and which was so dangerous to its wielder that the mages also crafted a massive juggernaut to carry the weapon). The Star Cairns had been mentioned as early as From the Ashes, which presents them as burial sites for high-level Suel mages. Carl Sargent, the sourcebook's author, seemed to point in the direction of the missing fifth cairn being a teleporter between the other four that went haywire and teleported itself. From the Ashes also suggested that the cairns were meant to be arranged in the shape of a pentagon or star.  Types of cairns  Weapons Research Cairn. Originally, the mages of this cairn were researching weapons of great power to use on the Baklunish. Due to quirks in the magical energy of the area, all weapons created or forged were more effective in the short run, but soon became cursed. For a time, the cairn was occupied by a party of doppelganger bandits. This cairn was devoted to the creation of armor. Since the cataclysm, however, the magical energies shifted to be more beneficial for necromancy. In years past, the cairn was a popular burial site, making it a target for necromancers and grave robbers. This cairn was used for the creation of vehicles of war, including a rumored juggernaut that would have carried a powerful magical artifact into battle. An outcast beholder recently took up residence in the cairn. As the name suggests, this cairn was used for the creation of numerous constructs designed for combat. This included rudimentary research in intelligent golems. The research created an intelligent and genocidal iron golem programmed to kill non-Suel. This cairn was where the most sensitive research was conducted, including research in replicating the Rain of Colorless Fire, as well as experiments in fiend summoning. The cataclysm affected these lines of research due to a bizarre coincidence: the meteor struck just as both wizards were activating test spells. The disruption in their work at such a critical moment caused the two spells to interact, pulling the cairn into a border area between the Astral, Ethereal and Prime Material planes.   Publishing historyThe Star Cairns had been mentioned as early as From the Ashes, which presents them as burial sites for high-level Suel mages. Carl Sargent, the sourcebook's author, seemed to point in the direction of the missing fifth cairn being a teleporter between the other four that went haywire and teleported itself. From the Ashes also suggested that the cairns were meant to be arranged in the shape of a pentagon or star.  SterichSterich, properly known as the March of Sterich, is a political state generally located in the southwestern portion of the Flanaess. It lies in a broad basin formed by the Stark Mounds to the north and northwest, by the Crystalmist Mountains to the west, and by the Jotens to the south.  It is separated from the Kingdom of Keoland by the Javan River. Sterich is ruled by Marquess Resbin Dren Emondav, a lawful neutral female human. The national capital is Istivin. The native folk of Sterich show strong Flan racial characteristics, tempered by Suel and Oeridian influences. Sterich's coat of arms is blazoned thus: Per fess dancetty gules and sable a lion rampant counterchanged.  SulmSulm refers to an ancient Flan kingdom which once occupied much of the Bright Desert, in the days when it was a fertile land. The ancestors of the Sulmi were nomads who lived in the grasslands where the Bright Desert lies today, living in harmony with the land and worshipping spirits of earth and air. Like most of the nomads in the region, they slowly became more sophisticated under the influence of the demigod Vathris. The Kingdom of Sulm came to prominence circa -1900 CY after it was bolstered by the necromantic adepts of Caerdiralor, who taught them dark secrets and promised wealth and glory in exchange for the favor of the Sulmi royal house. Throughout its history, the kingdom spent much of its time crushing its neighbors, the rival kingdoms of Durha, Itar, Ronhass, Rhugha, and Truun. Only the Kingdom of Itar was strong enough to stand against Sulm, though it, too, would eventually fall. Kyuss was a powerful priest of Nerull during Sulm's imperial age, shortly before its destruction. He was exiled for his profane experiments on undead in the sacred mortuary city of Unaagh, and traveled with hundreds of followers to the Amedio Jungle. In circa -700 CY the Kingdom of Sulm fell, destroyed by its last king. The king, Shattados, used the power of a dark artifact known as the Scorpion Crown in an attempt to gain perpetual dominion over his subjects. Instead, the crown turned Shattados into a gigantic scorpion and his people into manscorpions and (possibly) dune stalkers. A few became asheratis instead due to the grace of Geshtai. The land itself was even changed, transformed into a vast wasteland now known as the Bright Desert. SunndiSunndi is a political state situated in the  region of the Flanaess. (The name "Sunndi" was a near-homophone of Cindy, one of Gygax's children. ) In this edition, Sunndi's population was listed as 50,000+, and its ruler was identified simply as the Count of Sunndi.  Three years later, an almost identical paragraph appeared in Gygax’s World of Greyhawk boxed set (TSR 1015); however, the ruler was now identified by name as Count Hazendel. During the wars, Sunndi had been overrun by the armies of Ivid the Undying, but had managed to regain its independence. Wizards of the Coast took over TSR in 1997 and revived the moribund Greyhawk setting for their new Third Edition of Dungeons and Dragons. The storyline was advanced to 590 CY, and now dealt with the new alliances and problems that had developed in the wake of the Greyhawk Wars. Sunndi's current state at that time was a feudal hereditary monarchy of eighteen counties ruled by Olvenking Hazendel from the capital city of Pitchfield. PeopleSunndi's population numbers about 125,000, of which 79% are human of Oeridi and Suolise extraction, 9% are gray elves, 5% are mountain and hill dwarves, 3% are gnomes, 2% are halflings, 1% are half-elves, and 1% are other races. These races live in harmony and mutual self-defence.    ReligionNo single religion dominates this region, but significant deities worshipped include Pelor, Trithereon, Lydia, the Oeridian agricultural gods, the elvish, dwarvish and gnomish pantheons, Ulaa, Fortubo, Jascar, Norebo and Boccob.  GeographySunndi is a warm  and fertile land in the southeast corner of the Flanaess, lying between the Rieuwood Forest and Glorioles Mountains to the north, the Hestmark Highlands to the east, the Pawluck River to the west and the Vast Swamp to the southAlthough this is an easily defended land, its defensive strength is also its weakness, since it has no easy trade outlet for its grain, gold, electrum and gems other than the narrow Highland Trail through the Hestmark Highlands to the port of Dullstrand.   And the Vast Swamp is both a blessing and a curse, for although it defends Sunndi's southern border, it is also home to disease, strange monsters and warlike bullywugs that emerge from the fens every 15–20 years. Given its subtropical location, Sunndi's climate is warm year-round, with plentiful rainfall in the autumn and winter, and humid heat during the spring and summer.  Snow is a sure sign of magical evil afoot.    HistoryA thousand years ago, Suloise refugees fleeing from the ruin of the Twin Cataclysms entered the fertile lands south of the Rieuwood and befriended the indigenous gray elves. Later invasions by Oeridian raiders conquered the Suloise/elven alliance, but time was on Sunnndi's side and gradually the Oeridians were integrated.  After Aerdy conquered all Oeridian lands following the Battle of a Fortnight's Length in -110 CY, Sunndi was made a part of the South Province of the Great Kingdom. One of the overkings subsequently made Sunndi a separate fief within the South Province, ruled by a Count who swore fealty to the Herzog (prince) of South Province. Since the Count was appointed by the Herzog, the post was usually granted to the Sunnd noble who promised to extract the most tribute from the county to send to the Herzog. The result was oppressive taxation and overfarming, as well as suppression of non-human races. The gray elf Count Turentel Esparithen formed a government based on mutual respect for all peoples of Sunndi.  The herzogs of South Provinces attempted to retake Sunndi several times over the next century without success. However, in 577 CY, South Province received the backing it needed from the mad overking Ivid the Undying, and successfully invaded.  At the same time, bullywugs attacked from the Vast Swamp, pulling needed troops from the northern defences. It seemed that the battle for Sunndi was over, for nothing now stood between the herzog and Sunndi's fertile lands. However, a newly re-dedicated Sunnd army under the hero Osson met the South Province army at the Battle of Rieuwood and was triumphant, although an attempt by Osson to follow the herzog's troops across the Thelly River into South Province failed and the Sunnd army was forced to retreat back to Sunndi. In 589 CY, Count Hazendel declared to be Sunndi a fully independent kingdom, and proclaimed that all old ties with the Great Kingdom were forever severed. Hazendel became Olvenking Hazendel the Defender. The few Aerdy-descended noble houses that remained in Sunndi were ordered to rename themselves and swear allegiance to the crown.  In 590 CY (the year of the current campaign setting), eighteen scions from both human and nonhuman noble houses have been appointed to a Congress of Lords to advise the olvenking. Sunndi had been subdivided into eighteen counties,    and each lord of the Congress has been appointed count of one of these new regions.  Increased raids by monsters from the Vast Swamp remind the Sunnd government of the historic cycle of bullywug invasions, and Hazendel has ordered the construction of new forts along the edge of the swamp against an expected invasion within the next few years. Investigation suggested that followers of Wastri, upset by the good relations between humans and nonhumans in Sunndi, and especially repelled by the thought of an elf on the throne, may be behind the new round of attacks.  Thillonrian PeninsulaThe Thillonrian Peninsula, also known as Rhizia in the Cold Tongue, is a geographical area in the northeastern portion of the Flanaess. A cold, mountainous land, this region is best known for being the home of the nations of the Frost, Ice, and Snow Barbarians, as well as the nation of Stonehold. The peninsula is dominated by the Griff-Corusk mountain range, and is surrounded by the Icy Sea and the Solnor OceanThe Thillonrian Peninsula was mentioned by Stephen Colbert on the Colbert Report as a location travelled to by his player character, Farynieth.  link}}    UllUll is a political state situated in the Baklunish Basin region of the Flanaess, south of the Plains of the PaynimsThe native folk of Ull are more or less pureblooded Baklunish.  The Kingdom of Keoland began a series of occupations of Veluna in 350 CY, only to be ultimately driven out in 438 CY by the forces of Furyondy. In 446 CY, in an agreement known as the Concordat of Eademer, the Velunese College of Bishops voted overwhelmingly to break from the kingdom of Furyondy, establishing the current state known as the Archclericy of VelunaBecause the moon of Luna held special significance for the original Flan tribes in the area, the region is also sometimes known as the "Vale of Luna", or more simply, "The Vale"Modern Veluna is generally located in the western-central portion of the Flanaess. It is bordered by the Velverdyva River to the north and east; by the Fals River to the north and west; and by the Lortmil Mountains and the Kron Hills to the south.  Most of the original forests in the Vale have been clear cut to make way for farmland, or to supply lumber for building projects.  The only remaining woodlands of any note are the Ironwood, the Dapple Wood and the Asnath Copse. As of 591 CY, the most populous towns are Mitrik (pop. 11,100), and Devarnish (pop. 7,900)As of 591 CY, the population of Veluna totaled 668,800 persons, the vast majority (almost 80%) being humans of mainly Oeridian descent. Elves make up another 10% (mostly of the high elf variety), while the remainder of the population consists of gnomes, halflings, dwarves, half-elves, and half-orcsThe most popular deities among Velunans are Rao, Saint Cuthbert, Heironeous, the Oeridian agricultural gods, Fharlanghn, Zilchus, and the SeldarineThe most widely spoken languages in Veluna include Common, Velondi, Flan, Elven, Halfling, and GnomeThe Archclericy of Veluna is a theocracy devoted to the worship of Rao, and ruled by the Canon of Veluna, a powerful Raoan cleric advised by the College of Bishops and the Celestial Order of the Moons. Power to remove the Canon is shared between the College and the Celestial Order. The national capital is MitrikVeluna is divided into eight dioceses for the purpose of administering both church and secular functions. Seven of the dioceses are jointly ruled, half of the governing power being held by a bishop of Rao (appointed by the Canon), and the remaining power given to the most powerful secular noble family in each diocese. The eighth diocese, that of Veluna City, is governed by the Canon himself, though an archbishop is appointed to administer itAs of 591 CY, Veluna's chief of state is Canon HazenIn the Living Greyhawk Campaign, in early 594 CY Canon Hazen was slain by the lich Herion.  Priffin Truft, the Archbishop of the Royal College, was chosen as his successorVeluna's bicameral legislature consists of the College of Bishops and the Celestial Order of the MoonsThe College of Bishops is a council that advises the Canon and maintains various religious functions in Veluna. The College consists of the Bishop of Rao from each of Veluna's seven dioceses, the Archbishop of Veluna City, the rulers of the local churches of Saint Cuthbert and Heironeous, the High Priest of the Knights of Veluna, a representative from the elven churches, and other members appointed by the CanonThe Celestial Order of the Moons consists of 15 members: two representatives from the ruling secular noble families of each diocese, and a representative from the Viscounty of Verbobonc. The nobles retain all voting power, while the representative from Verbobonc serves only as an advisor. The Order is presided over by the Archbishop of Veluna City, though he serves no other 'official' capacityVeluna's coat of arms is blazoned thus: Sable, quarterly a crescent or, over all a mullet of four points argentVeluna is noted for its foodstuffs, and mining operations to produce copper, silver, and goldThe Veluna standard coinage consists of the platinum brilliant (pp), gold crook (gp), electrum staff (ep), silver tower (sp), and copper hand (cp). Verbobonc Verbobonc, properly known as the Viscounty and Town of Verbobonc, is a semi-independent nation of the Flanaess. Though Verbobonc owes fealty to the Archclericy of Veluna, it is nearly autonomous in practice.  In the Living Greyhawk campaign, Verbobonc corresponds to the states of Illinois and Indiana. It pioneered a system for allowing Living Greyhawk player characters to develop towns, open businesses, and establish strongholds, something previously beyond the scope of the Living Greyhawk campaign. Player-created towns tend to reflect the personalities of the player characters who pool their resources to "found" a town. Wild Coast Little more than a collection of five major city-states for most of its history, the Wild Coast has long held a reputation for being untamed. Prior to the Greyhawk Wars, each city-state controlled its own affairs.  However, things changed once Turrosh Mak gained control of the Pomarj.  In 584 CY, Mak's forces marched north, taking the towns of Elredd, Badwall, and Fax, thus conquering the entire southern Wild Coast.  The remaining towns of Safeton and Narwell escaped destruction only by swearing fealty to Greyhawk, resulting in the northern Wild Coast being absorbed into the Free City's domain. Wolf NomadsThe Wolf Nomads, properly known as the Wegwiur, is a political state of the Flanaess. After the death of the Kha-Khan Ogobanuk, the Tiger Nomads split from the Horde and the Wolf Nomads came to be ruled by a ruler known as the tarkhan. Since then, the tarkhans have ruled according to the decrees set forth in the Great Yassa of Ogobanuk, which describes the traditions of illusion, leadership, and the proper way of nomadic lifeThe Wolf Nomads have opposed Iuz since he first appeared on the borders of his lands. Iuz claimed the Howling Hills, where the Wolf Nomads have traditionally buried their honored dead, including Ogobanuk himself. They defeated him at the Battle of Black Water Bend just before the Greyhawk Wars, breaking the Old One's siege of Eru-Tovar. After the wars, Tang the Horrific encouraged them to invade Iuz's kingdom, and many of the cambion's nonhuman troops were slainThe lands of the Wolf Nomads are situated in the Bitter North region of the Flanaess, north of Perrenland on the far shore of Lake QuagThe native folk of the Wolf Nomads are primarily Baklunish with a great deal of genetic mixture with the Rovers of the Barrens, to the east. As a result of these Flan characteristics, Wolf Nomads have slightly darker complexions than their Tiger Nomad cousins. Each Wolf Nomad warrior must capture a wild wolf cub as a rite of manhood, raising it to be his companion. "Civilized" Wolf Nomads in Eru-Tovar sometimes simply buy wolf cubsThe Wolf Nomads revere the Baklunish deities Geshtai and Istus. From long-ago contact with the Oerids, some of whom also became part of the Relentless Horde, they revere Telchur and the Black Wolf, their name for Kurell. Ancestor worship is prevalent among them as wellIn Rose Estes' novels, the Wolf Nomads revere a deity they call the Great She Wolf, whom they refer to as the "mother of us all"The Wolf Nomads speak Ordai, a language closely related to that of their Paynim ancestorsThe Wolf Nomads' coat of arms is blazoned thus: Sable, three wolves courant in pale gules. Yeomanry The modern Yeomanry is located in the southwestern portion of the Flanaess. It is nestled entirely within a broad basin bounded by the Jotens to the north, the Crystalmist Mountains to the west and south, and the Little Hills to the east. The valley passage between the Little Hills and the Tors leads directly into the Hool Marshes. A long cave system known as the Passage of Slerotin tunnels under the Hellfurnaces from the town of Dark Gate in the Yeomanry, finally emerging over 200 miles away into the Sea of Dust. CalendarThe Common Year (CY) Reckoning is a fictional dating system used in the World of Greyhawk campaign setting for the Dungeons & Dragons role-playing gameIn the mid-1970s, Gary Gygax created a campaign world called Greyhawk for the new fantasy roleplaying game called Dungeons and Dragons that he was helping to develop.  In the 1980 TSR publication World of Greyhawk (TSR 9025), he included a brief timeline of twenty-one historical events  that described a thousand years of history in order to explain how his world—the Flanaess—had arrived at its present state of affairs. There were five major cultures involved in this timeline, each of them with their own calendar system:  Suloise: Suloise Dating or Suloise Dominion (SD) Olven: Olven Calendar (OC) Bakluni: Baklunish Hegira or Baklunish Hierarchy (BH) Flan: Flan Tally (FT) Oeridian: Oeridian Record or Oeridian Reckoning (OR)  One of the major events of Gygax's timeline was an invasion by the Oeridian people, which forced other cultures to the peripheries of this land and led to the formation of the Great Kingdom of Aerdy. The first emperor marked the start of this new empire with a new universal calendar, Common Year ReckoningGygax calculated all events that had taken place before 1 CY as negative numbers, and since there was no 0 CY—the year previous to 1 CY was -1 CY—this forced an extra calculation when attempting to convert Common Year dates prior to 1 CY to the other calendar systems. However, by the start of Gygax's campaign (set as 576 CY), the Common Year Reckoning was used almost universally by most cultures, making conversions to the other calendar systems by dungeon masters largely unnecessaryDays, weeks, and months within the Common Year are reckoned using the Greyhawk Calendar.   WeatherExcept in the far north, temperatures reach below zero only in the winter months of Sunsebb and Fireseek and sometimes at night in late autumn and early spring. The northeast and central regions of the Flanaess are the coldest, with winters extending into Ready'reat and Readying. Summer typically lasts five or more months. Prevailing winds blow from the northeast in winter and autumn and from the southeast the rest of the year. Wintry northern winds are sometimes known as "Telchur's breath," while easterly winds are sometimes called "Atroa's laugh" Plentiful rainfall supports bountiful agriculture throughout most of the Flanaess. Notes  References   Baur, Wolfgang. "History of the Greyhawk Wars". Reynolds, and Frederick Weining.

Alghero<====>45551<====>Alghero   Alghero ( ;  ,  ,  ;  ;  ), is a town of about 44,000 inhabitants in the Italian insular province of Sassari in northwestern Sardinia, next to the Mediterranean Sea. Part of its population descends from Catalan conquerors from the end of the Middle Ages, when Sardinia was part of the Crown of Aragon. Hence, the Catalan language is co-official (a unique situation in Italy) and known as the Alguerès dialect. Alghero is the third university center in the island, coming after Cagliari and Sassari. It hosts the headquarters of the Università degli Studi di Sassari’s Architecture and Design department. In 2012 it was the 10th most visited city by tourists in Italy. History  For ecclesiastical history, see Roman Catholic Diocese of Alghero-Bosa  The area of today's Alghero has been settled since pre-historic times. The Ozieri culture was present here in the 4th millennium BC (Necropolis of Anghelu Ruju), while the Nuraghe civilization settled in the area around 1,500 BCThe Phoenicians had arrived by the 8th century BC and the metalworking town of Sant'Imbenia, with a mixed Phoenician and Nuragic population, engaged in trade with the Etruscans on the Italian mainland. Due to its strategic position on the Mediterranean Sea, Alghero had been developed into a fortified port town by 1102, built by the Genoese Doria family.  Alghero's population later grew because of the arrival of Catalan colonists. In the early 16th century Alghero received papal recognition as a bishopric and the status of King's City (ciutat de l'Alguer) and developed economically.  Historically, the city was founded in the early twelfth century between 1102 and 1112, when the noble Doria family of Genoa was allowed to build the first historical nucleus into an empty section of the coast of the parish of Nulauro in Judicature of Torres (Sassari). 		For two centuries remained in the orbit of the Maritime Republics, first and foremost the Genoese apart from 1283-1284 when the Pisans were able to control it for a year. It is plausible that at this time the town shared, given its commercial and multi-ethnic nature, a language similar to the nascent Sassarese.   		The village was conquered by force by the Crown of Aragon, at the behest of Peter IV d'Aragona, who later actively promoted colonisation of the town and the surrounding area, sending numerous families from different counties and provinces of the then Crown of Aragon, including Valencia, Majorca, Catalonia and Aragon. These were granted enticing privileges, and in fact replaced the original population some of whom were sent to the Iberian Peninsula and Majorca as slaves.  The dialects these families spoke in Alghero, were all very similar and derived from the same linguistic family. Over time it settled on its current form of Catalan, despite the subsequent decline of the Crown of Aragon. Alghero today is struggling to retain the use of Catalan, which is a linguistic island and only 10-15% of its inhabitants speak it in its Alghero variant. The language is recognized by both the Italian Republic and Sardinia as a minority language. Nowadays it is poorly spoken by young people. The city is trying for some time to protect this dialect, through education programs and official use within the local authority. The citizens currently residing in Alghero however, are mostly from the surrounding territories and prefer either the Italian language or Sardinian and Sassarese. Alghero still maintains a small representation at the Generalitat de Catalunya (the autonomous government of Catalonia), without actually having any institutional power in the territory apart from providing assistance to the preservation of Catalan culture. 		The city, one of the principal of Sardinia and the fifth most populated region, is one of the gateways to the Island thanks to the nearby airport. It is the capital of the Riviera del Corallo, whose name derives from the fact that its waters provide an abundant supply of precious red coral of the finest quality. Historically the processing and sale of the material has been of great importance to the economy and a branch of coral is inserted in the emblem of the cityThe Aragonese were followed by the Spanish Habsburgs, who ruled until 1702 and continued expanding the town. In 1720 Alghero, along with the rest of Sardinia, was handed over to the Piedmont-based House of Savoy. In 1821 a famine led to a revolt by the population, which was bloodily suppressed. During World War II (1943) Alghero was bombed, and its historical centre suffered heavy damage. The presence of malaria in the countryside was finally overcome in the 1950sSince then, Alghero has become a popular tourist resort. Physical geography  LocationAlghero is located in the northwestern coast of Sardinia, along the bay named after the city. In the north of the urban area there is the Nurra plain, to the NW the karstic systems of Capo Caccia, Punta Giglio and Monte Doglia. The south is built mainly by mountains and the plateaus of Villanova Monteleone and Bosa. ClimateThe climate at Alghero is mild due to the presence of the sea, which attenuates the temperatures especially during the summer. Summers are warm like in most part of the Mediterranean. Winters are also tempered, with the thermometers showing negative Celsius temperatures just a few days per year.   Language and culture  A dialect of Catalan is spoken in Alghero, introduced when Catalans settled in the town.  Catalan was replaced as the official language of the Island by Spanish in the 17th century, then by Italian. The most recent linguistic research showed that 24,1% of the people have Algherese Catalan as a mother tongue, which is habitually spoken by 18,5% and taught to the children by 8% of the population, whereas 88,2% have some understanding of the language.   Since 1997 Catalan has had official recognition and national and regional laws grant its right to be used in the city. Currently, there has been a revival of the arts in Algherese Catalan, with singers such as Franca Masu performing original compositions in the language. Following a rural exodus from the surrounding villages towards the city, much of the population speaks or has some proficiency in Sardinian, in addition to Italian and Catalan. Historically, the spread of Catalan was limited to the city and part of the coast, as the surrounding countryside has always been populated by Sardinian-speaking peopleMoreover, the ancient part of Alghero shows many characteristics of Catalan medieval architecture. The ‘algueresos’ (Alghero inhabitants) usually refer to their city as ‘Barceloneta’ – little Barcelona – because of their ancestry and fraternity with the Catalan capital. Monuments and points of interest The many historical dominances occurred in Alghero have created a rich variety of monuments, buildings and sights. Back from the Neolithic period from which many settlements remain, up to nowadays, in the last decades Alghero has become a touristic main point not only because of its coast and natural beauties but also because of a fairly well preserved patrimony. Archeological sitesSeveral archeological sites out of the urban area: the Anghelu Ruju necropolis, the Santu Pedru hill, the Villa Romana of Santa Imbenia or even the Purissima. Many nuraghi in some other points as Palmavera are also well preserved and open to visit. RampartsThe first ramparts system looks back to the 13th century and was imported from the Genovese system. In 1354 the city was occupied by Catalans, who restored and expanded the defensive system, back then in bad condition. Some features from the old walls were respected, but Ferdinand the Catholic, who wanted to grant more protection to the city, built the majority of them in the 16th Century. Along the walls 7 towers and 3 forts are found.   Religious architecture   Alghero Cathedral (Cattedrale di Santa Maria Immacolata di Alghero) is the seat of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Alghero-Bosa (initially bishopric of Alghero). Construction started in 1570, and although it was opened in 1593, it was not until 1730 until it was finished and consecrated. The original church was in the Catalan-Gothic style, as can be seen in the five chapels of the presbytery, which also include the base of the bell tower. The nave and the two aisles are of late Renaissance style. In the 20th century a Neo-Classical narthex was added to the façade, radically altering its appearance. Francis (1360, rebuilt in the late 16th century). Original Catalan-Gothic parts can be seen over the high altar, the presbytery chapels and the San Sacramento Chapel. The bell tower is from the first half of the 16th century. The Madonna del Santo Rosario.   Others  The Torre del Portal, built at the expense of the Jewish community in Alghero in 1360, and the Tower dell'Esperò Reial (16th century). Palazzo D'Albis (16th century), a typical example of the Aragonese architecture of the 16th century. Neptune's Grotto, a large cave discovered in the 19th century. Palazzo CarcassonaCorallium RubrumThe coral of Alghero, is known as among the finest in the Mediterranean and the world for the particular reputation of quantity, quality, compression and the ruby red color, much to remember one of the most important economic aspects of the territory, also called the Riviera del Corallo, and have in his coat of arms a branch of the precious red coral on a foundation of rock. For the particular combination with the jewelery and goldsmith craft is also called red gold so much so that it is sold at the same price of the precious metal. Territory Another of Alghero features is its landscape. It has several beaches, bays and natural parks on the shoreline. Capo Caccia promontory and its lighthouse are landmarks. Coast and Beaches   Spiaggia di Poglina o della Speranza. Lazzaretto Mugoni La Stalla   Natural Parks   Area naturale marina protetta Capo Caccia - Isola Piana. Parco regionale di Porto Conte.   Capo Caccia Panojpg|Panoramic view, Capo Caccia La Speranzajpg|La Speranza beach MariaPia Alghero2jpg|Maria Pia beach La Speranza Algherojpg|Another caption of La Speranza   Transport and infrastructures Alghero is well-connected. Roads lead to Sassari, the province’s capital. The main port for passengers is 30 kilometers away and  Alghero – Fertilia airport has national and international flights. RoadsStrada statale 127bis Settentrionale Sarda, leading to Porto Conte (north) and Sassari (east). Strada statale 291 della Nurra, from Fertilia to Sassari. Strada provinciale 42 dei Due Mari, reaching the port in Porto Torres. Strada provinciale 105 Alghero-Bosa, panoramical road, it starts in the southern part of Alghero and goes along the shore to Bosa. Strada statale 291 dir del Calich, assuring the connection to and from the airport. Trains Alghero has a train station in the Pietraia neighborhood, Sant’Agostino, with daily trains to Sassari. Port There is a pleasure and fishing port in the heart of the city. Passenger traffic is handled by Porto Torres, some 30 kilometers north. There are ferry services from there to Genoa, Barcelona and Civitavecchia. AirportThe Alghero-Fertilia "Riviera del Corallo" Airport is 10 kilometers from the centre near Fertilia. It’s the principal connection with the rest of Italy and Europe. There is hourly bus service to Fertilia and the centre of Alghero. Gallery  File:Alghero's Cathedral of Santa Mariajpg|The Cathedral of Santa Maria File:Cartello Catalano AHOjpg|Bilingual street signs in Catalan and Italian File:Alghero Old town streetjpg|A street in Alghero File:Grotta di nettuno sardinienjpg|Neptune's Grotto   Twin towns    Balaguer, Catalonia, Spain   Tarragona, Catalonia, Spain   Palma de Mallorca, Balearic Islands, Spain   Encamp, Andorra   See also   Diocese of Alghero-Bosa (initially Alghero) Alghero - Fertilia Airport History of Sardinia   References  External links   City of Alghero Official websiteOfficial Alghero tourism web site. 

Portuguese Mozambique<====>45567<====>Portuguese MozambiquePortuguese Mozambique ( ) or Portuguese East Africa (África Oriental Portuguesa) are the common terms by which Mozambique is designated when referring to the historic period when it was a Portuguese overseas territory. Portuguese Mozambique constituted a string of Portuguese colonies and later a single Portuguese overseas province along the south-east African coast, which now forms the Republic of MozambiquePortuguese trading settlements and, later, colonies, were formed along the coast from 1498, when Vasco da Gama first reached the Mozambican coast. He settled permanently in present-day Mozambique, where he spent most of his life, and his work was followed by other Portuguese explorers, sailors and traders. Some of these colonies were handed over in the late 19th century for rule by chartered companies such as the Mozambique Company (Companhia de Moçambique), which had the concession of the lands corresponding to the present-day provinces of Manica and Sofala, and the Niassa Company (Companhia do Niassa), which had controlled the lands of the modern provinces of Cabo Delgado and Niassa. In 1951 the colonies were combined into a single overseas province under the name   as an integral part of Portugal. Most of the original colonies have given their names to the modern provinces of MozambiqueMozambique, according to official policy, was not a colony at all but rather a part of the "pluricontinental and multiracial nation" of Portugal. Portugal sought in Mozambique, as it did in all its colonies, to Europeanise the local population and assimilate them into Portuguese culture. Lisbon also wanted to retain the colonies as trading partners and markets for its goods. African inhabitants of the colony were ultimately supposed to become full citizens with full political rights through a long development process. To that end, segregation in Mozambique was minimal compared to that in neighbouring South Africa. DesignationDuring its history as a Portuguese colony, the present-day territory of Mozambique had the following formal designations:   1501–1569: Captaincy of Sofala ( ) 1570–1676: Captaincy of Mozambique and Sofala (Capitania de Moçambique e Sofala) 1676–1836: Captaincy-General of Mozambique and Rivers of Sofala (Capitania-Geral de Moçambique e Rios de Sofala) 1836–1891: Province of Mozambique (Província de Moçambique) 1891–1893: State of Eastern Africa (Estado da África Oriental) 1893–1926: Province of Mozambique (Província de Moçambique) 1926–1951: Colony of Mozambique (Colónia de Moçambique) 1951–1972: Province of Mozambique (Província de Moçambique) 1972–1975: State of Mozambique (Estado de Moçambique)   OverviewUntil the 20th century the land and peoples of Mozambique were barely affected by the Europeans who came to its shores and entered its major rivers. As the Muslim traders, mostly Swahili, were displaced from their coastal centres and routes to the interior by the Portuguese, migrations of Bantu peoples continued and tribal federations formed and reformed as the relative power of local chiefs changed. For four centuries the Portuguese presence was meagre. Coastal and river trading posts were built, abandoned, and built again. Governors sought personal profits to take back to Portugal, and colonists were not attracted to the distant area with its relatively unattractive climate; those who stayed were traders who married local women and successfully maintained relations with local chiefsIn Portugal, however, Mozambique was considered to be a vital part of a world empire. Periodic recognition of the relative insignificance of the revenues it could produce was tempered by the mystique which developed regarding the mission of the Portuguese to bring their civilization to the African territory. It was believed that through missionary activity and other direct contact between Africans and Europeans, the Africans could be taught to appreciate and participate in Portuguese cultureIn the last decade of the 19th century and the first part of the 20th century, integration of Mozambique into the structure of the Portuguese nation was begun. After all of the area of the present province had been recognized by other European powers as belonging to Portugal, pacification of the tribes of the interior was completed and the traditional holders of political power were subordinated to the Portuguese. Civil administration was established throughout the area, the building of an infrastructure was begun, and agreements regarding the transit trade of Mozambique's land-locked neighbours to the west were madePortugal never officially had a racist policy or sanctioned discrimination based on race. Its concept of what it called a "multiracial society" envisaged complete racial integration, including intermarriage, as well as cultural adaptation. The historically determined position of the Portuguese as conquerors and governors of the Africans, however, resulted in barriers to the formation of this ideal. The fact that most Africans were not "cultivated" in the Portuguese sense, and that many participated in what were considered by the Portuguese to be pagan beliefs and uncivilized behaviour, tended to create a low opinion of Africans as a group. The uneducated Portuguese immigrant peasants in urban areas were frequently in direct competition with Africans for jobs and demonstrated jealousies and prejudices with racial overtonesThe society was divided into two peripherally interrelated sectors. The urban-based modern sector, comprising altogether between 2 and 25 percent of the population, consisting mostly of Europeans but including a few thousand Europeanised Africans, Indians, and Chinese, was dominant in the economic, political, and social realms. Communication between this sector and the large majority of rural Africans was limited; only a small proportion of the Africans could speak Portuguese, the language of the administration and the modern economic sector. Communication between members of the ten different major ethnolinguistic groups was also difficultEconomically and socially, all but a few educated and Europeanised Africans were at a disadvantage vis-à-vis the Europeans. Access to education above the primary level was limited by lack of means, by age limitations, or by lack of sufficient preparations. Access to economic opportunity was limited by lack of adequate trainingBetween the modern urban and traditional rural sectors of the society was a steadily increasing group of Africans who were loosening their ties with the village and starting to participate in the money economy, to settle in suburbs, and to adopt new customs. This transitional group included individuals who had acquired a modicum of education or skills and some of the aspirations associated with a modern European way of life. Many of them, especially those who had an education beyond the primary level, were more alert politically than the majority of the population, who are either unaware of or uninterested in political issues. It was members of this group, allied with forward-looking European leaders and intellectuals, who had shown the greatest interest in reforms and benefits for the African population. Some among them left the country to become active participants in the independence movement. HistoryWhen Portuguese explorers reached East Africa in 1498, Swahili commercial settlements had existed along the Swahili Coast and outlying islands for several centuries. From about 1500, Portuguese trading posts and forts became regular ports of call on the new route to the eastThe voyage of Vasco da Gama around the Cape of Good Hope into the Indian Ocean in 1498 marked the Portuguese entry into trade, politics, and society in the Indian Ocean world. The Portuguese gained control of the Island of Mozambique and the port city of Sofala in the early 16th century. Vasco da Gama having visited Mombasa in 1498, was then successful in reaching India and this permitted the Portuguese to trade with the Far East directly by sea, thus challenging older trading networks of mixed land and sea routes, such as the spice trade routes that used the Persian Gulf, Red Sea and caravans to reach the eastern MediterraneanThe Republic of Venice had gained control over much of the trade routes between Europe and Asia. After traditional land routes to India had been closed by the Ottoman Turks, Portugal hoped to use the sea route pioneered by da Gama to break the Venetian trading monopoly. Initially, Portuguese rule in East Africa focused mainly on a coastal strip centred in Mombasa.  Their main goal was to dominate trade with India. As the Portuguese settled along the coast, they made their way into the hinterland as   (backwoodsmen). These   lived alongside Swahili traders and even took up service among Shona kings as interpreters and political advisors. By the 1530s, small groups of Portuguese traders and prospectors penetrated the interior regions seeking gold, where they set up garrisons and trading posts at Sena and Tete on the Zambezi River and tried to gain exclusive control over the gold trade. They recorded a wealth of information about the Mutapa kingdom as well as its predecessor, Great Zimbabwe. According to Swahili traders whose accounts were recorded by the Portuguese historian João de Barros, Great Zimbabwe was an ancient capital city built of stones of marvellous size without the use of mortar. And while the site was not within Mutapa's borders, the Mwenemutapa kept noblemen and some of his wives there.  The Portuguese attempted to legitimate and consolidate their trade and settlement positions through the creation of   (land grants) tied to Portuguese settlement and administration. While   were originally developed to be held by Portuguese, through intermarriage they became African Portuguese or African Indian centres defended by large African slave armies known as Chikunda. Historically, within Mozambique, there was slavery. Human beings were bought and sold by African tribal chiefs, Arab traders, and the Portuguese. Many Mozambican slaves were supplied by tribal chiefs who raided warring tribes and sold their captives to the  Although Portuguese influence gradually expanded, its power was limited and exercised through individual settlers and officials who were granted extensive autonomy. The Portuguese were able to wrest much of the coastal trade from Arabs between 1500 and 1700, but, with the Arab seizure of Portugal's key foothold at Fort Jesus on Mombasa Island (now in Kenya) in 1698, the pendulum began to swing in the other direction. As a result, investment lagged while Lisbon devoted itself to the more lucrative trade with India and the Far East and to the colonisation of Brazil. During the 18th and 19th centuries, the Mazrui and Omani Arabs reclaimed much of the Indian Ocean trade, forcing the Portuguese to retreat south. Many   had declined by the mid-19th century, but several of them survived. During the 19th century other European powers, particularly the British and the French, became increasingly involved in the trade and politics of the region. In the Island of Mozambique, the hospital, a majestic neo-classical building constructed in 1877 by the Portuguese, with a garden decorated with ponds and fountains, was for many years the biggest hospital south of the Sahara.  By the early 20th century the Portuguese had shifted the administration of much of Mozambique to large private companies, like the Mozambique Company, the Zambezia Company and the Niassa Company, controlled and financed mostly by the British, which established, with the Portuguese, railroad lines to neighbouring countries. Although slavery had been legally abolished in Mozambique by the Portuguese authorities, at the end of the 19th century the Chartered companies enacted a forced labour policy and supplied cheap – often forced – African labour to the mines and plantations of the nearby British colonies and South Africa. The Zambezia Company, the most profitable chartered company, took over a number of smaller   holdings, and requested Portuguese military outposts to protect its property. The chartered companies and the Portuguese administration built roads and ports to bring their goods to market including a railroad linking present day Zimbabwe with the Mozambican port of Beira. However, the development's administration gradually started to pass directly from the trading companies to the Portuguese government itselfBecause of their unsatisfactory performance and because of the shift, under the   regime of Oliveira Salazar, towards a stronger Portuguese control of the Portuguese Empire's economy, the companies' concessions were not renewed when they ran out. This was what happened in 1942 with the Mozambique Company, which however continued to operate in the agricultural and commercial sectors as a corporation, and had already happened in 1929 with the termination of the Niassa Company's concessionIn the 1950s, the Portuguese overseas colony was rebranded an overseas province of Portugal, and by the early 1970s it was officially upgraded to the status of Portuguese non-sovereign state, by which it would remain a Portuguese territory but with a wider administrative autonomy. After ten years of sporadic warfare and after Portugal's return to democracy through a leftist military coup in Lisbon which replaced Portugal's   regime in favor of a military junta (the Carnation Revolution of April 1974), FRELIMO took control of the territory. The talks that led to an agreement on Mozambique's independence, signed in Lusaka, were started. Within a year, almost all ethnic Portuguese population had left, many fleeing in fear (in mainland Portugal they were known as  ); others were expelled by the ruling power of the newly independent territory. GovernmentAt least since the early 19th century, the legal status of Mozambique always considered it as much a part of Portugal as Lisbon, but as an overseas province enjoyed special derogations to account for its distance from EuropeFrom 1837, the highest government official in the province of Mozambique has always been the governor-general, who reported directly to the Government in Lisbon, usually through the minister of the Overseas. During some periods in the late 19th and the early 20th century, the governors-general of Mozambique received the status of royal commissioners or of high commissioners, which gave them extended executive and legislative powers, equivalent to those of a government ministerIn the 20th century, the province was also subject to the authoritarian   regime that ruled Portugal from 1933 to 1974, until the military coup in Lisbon, known as the Carnation Revolution. Most members of the government of Mozambique were from Portugal, but a few were Africans. Nearly all members of the bureaucracy were from Portugal, as most Africans did not have the necessary qualifications to obtain positionsThe government of Mozambique, as it was in Portugal, was highly centralized. Power was concentrated in the executive branch, and all elections where they occurred were carried out using indirect methods. From the Prime Minister's office in Lisbon, authority extended down to the most remote posts and   of Mozambique through a rigid chain of command. The authority of the government of Mozambique was residual, primarily limited to implementing policies already decided in Europe. In 1967, Mozambique also sent seven delegates to the National Assembly in LisbonThe highest official in the province was the governor-general, appointed by the Portuguese cabinet on recommendation of the Overseas Minister. The governor-general had both executive and legislative authority. A Government Council advised the governor-general in the running of the province. The functional cabinet consisted of five secretaries appointed by the Overseas Minister on the advice of the governor. A Legislative Council had limited powers and its main activity was approving the provincial budget. Each subdivision was then made up of three or four individual posts, 166 in all with an average of 40,000 Africans in each. Each district, except Lourenço Marques which was run by the governor-general, was overseen by a governor. Most Africans only had contact with the Portuguese through the post administrator, who was required to visit each village in his domain at least once a yearThe lowest level of administration was the  , settlements inhabited by Africans living according to customary law. Each   was run by a  , an African or Portuguese official chosen on the recommendation of local residents. Under the  , each village had its own African headmanEach level of government could also have an advisory board or council. They were established in municipalities with more than 500 electors, in smaller municipalities or circumscriptions with more than 300 electors, and in posts with more than 20 electors. Each district also had its own board as wellTwo legal systems were in force — Portuguese civil law and African customary law. Until 1961, Africans were considered to be   or natives, rather than citizens. After 1961, the previous native laws were repealed and Africans gained de facto Portuguese citizenship. From then on, the status of Africans depended merely on whether or not they chose to be governed by civil law, and the number of Africans that made the choice was very small. GeographyPortuguese East Africa was located in south-eastern Africa. It was a long coastal strip with Portuguese strongholds, from current day Tanzania and Kenya, to the south of current-day Mozambique. The Nyassa Company territory is now   and  In the early- and mid-20th century, a number of changes occurred. Firstly, on 28 June 1919, the Treaty of Versailles transferred the Kionga Triangle, a   territory south of the Rovuma River from German East Africa to MozambiqueDuring World War II, the Charter of the Mozambique Company expired, on 19 July 1942; its territory, known as Manica and Sofala, became a district of Mozambique. At the same time, the   district was divided into Gaza, Inhambane and  , while the   district was split from Manica and SofalaBy the early 1970s, Mozambique was bordering the Mozambique Channel, bordering the countries of Malawi, Rhodesia, South Africa, Swaziland, Tanzania, and Zambia. With a tropical to subtropical climate, the Zambezi flows through the north-central and most fertile part of the country.    — Nampula   — Porto Amélia;    — Vila Cabral  Other important urban centres included Sofala, Nacala,  António Enes, Island of Mozambique and Vila Junqueiro.  DemographicsBy 1970, the Portuguese Overseas Province of Mozambique had about 8,168,933 inhabitants. Nearly 300,000 were white ethnic Portuguese. There was a number of mulattoes, from both European and African ancestry, living across the territory. However, the majority of the population belonged to local tribal groups which included the Makua–Lomwe, the Shona and the Tsonga. Other ethnic minorities included British, Greeks, Chinese and Indians. Most inhabitants were black indigenous Africans with a diversity of ethnic and cultural backgrounds, ranging from Shangaan and Makonde to Yao or Shona peoples. The Makua were the largest ethnic group in the north. The Sena and Shona (mostly Ndau) were prominent in the Zambezi valley, and the Shangaan (Tsonga) dominated in the south. In addition, several other minority groups lived a tribal lifestyle across the territoryMozambique had around 250,000 Europeans in 1974 that made up around 3% of the population. The white population was more influenced from South Africa. The capital of Portuguese Mozambique, Lourenço Marques (Maputo), had a population of 355,000 in 1970 with around 100,000 Europeans. Beira had around 115,000 inhabitants at the time with around 30,000 Europeans. Society  The establishment of a dual, racialized civil society was formally recognized in   (The Statute of Indigenous Populations) adopted in 1929, and was based in the subjective concept of civilization versus tribalism. Portugal's colonial authorities were totally committed to develop a fully multiethnic civilized society in its African colonies, but that goal or civilizing mission, would only be achieved after a period of Europeanization or enculturation of the native black tribes and ethnocultural groups. It was a policy which had already been stimulated in the former Portuguese colony of Brazil and in Portuguese Angola. The   established a distinction between the colonial citizens, subject to the Portuguese laws and entitled to all citizenship rights and duties effective in the metropole, and the   (natives), subjected to colonial legislation and, in their daily lives, to their customary, tribal native laws. The   were subject to the traditional authorities, who were gradually integrated into the colonial administration and charged with solving disputes, managing the access to land, and guaranteeing the flows of workforce and the payment of taxes. As several authors have pointed out (Mamdani 1996; Gentili 1999; O'Laughlin 2000), the   regime was the political system that subordinated the immense majority of Mozambicans to local authorities entrusted with governing, in collaboration with the lowest echelon of the colonial administration, the native communities described as tribes and assumed to have a common ancestry, language, and culture. The colonial use of traditional law and structures of power was thus an integral part of the process of colonial domination (Young 1994; Penvenne 1995; O'Laughlin 2000) obsessed with the maximization of economic development and growth through the use of idle or unproductive African workforceIn the 1940s, the integration of traditional authorities into the colonial administration was deepened, a level of social integration, miscegenation and social promotion based in skill and human qualities of each individual, rather than in the ethnic background, which was coined   and had been a major feature of the Portuguese Empire throughout history. The Portuguese colony was divided into   (municipalities), in urban areas, governed by colonial and metropolitan legislation, and   (localities), in rural areas. The   were led by a colonial administrator and divided into   (subdivisions of circunscrições), headed by   (tribal chieftains), the embodiment of traditional authorities. 5639, of July 29, 1944, attributed to   and their assistants, the  , the status of   (administrative assistants). Gradually, these traditional titles lost some of their content, and the   and   came to be viewed as an effective part of the colonial state, remunerated for their participation in the collection of taxes, recruitment of the labor force, and agricultural production in the area under their control. To exercise their power, the   and   had their own police force. This system of indirect rule illustrates what the disjunction between political and administrative control. In major urban areas, most notoriously the cosmopolitan provincial ports of   and Beira, racial integration and socioeconomic opportunities for all kind of skilled citizens were already very deep. From then on, all Africans were considered Portuguese citizens, and racial discrimination became a sociological rather than a legal feature of colonial society. The rule of traditional authorities was indeed integrated more than before in the colonial administrationEthnic African inhabitants of the Portuguese overseas provinces were ultimately supposed to become full citizens with full political rights through a long development process. To that end, by the 1960s and 1970s, segregation in Mozambique was minimal compared to that in neighbouring South Africa. Urban centres The largest coastal cities, the first founded or settled by Portuguese people since the 16th century, like the capital  , Beira, Quelimane, Nacala and Inhambane were modern cosmopolitan ports and a melting pot of several cultures, with a strong South African influence.  The Southeast African and Portuguese cultures were dominant, but the influence of Arab, Indian, and Chinese cultures were also felt. The cuisine was diverse, owing especially to the Portuguese cuisine and Muslim heritage, and seafood was also quite abundantLourenço Marques had always been a point of interest for artistic and architectural development since the first days of its urban expansion and this strong artistic spirit was responsible for attracting some of the world's most forward architects at the turn of the 20th century. The city was home to masterpieces of building work by, Pancho Guedes, Herbert Baker and Thomas Honney amongst others. The earliest architectural efforts around the city focused on classical European designs such as the Central Train Station (CFM) designed by architects Alfredo Augusto Lisboa de Lima, Mario Veiga and Ferreira da Costa and built between 1913 and 1916 (sometimes mistaken with the work of Gustav Eiffel),  and the Hotel Polana designed by Herbert BakerAs the 1960s and 1970s approached,   was yet again at the center of a new wave of architectural influences made most popular by Pancho Guedes. The designs of the 1960s and 1970s were characterized by modernist movements of clean, straight and functional structures. However, prominent architects such as Pancho Guedes fused this with local art schemes giving the city's buildings a unique Mozambican theme. As a result, most of the properties erected during the second construction boom take on these styling cues. EconomySince the 15th century, Portugal founded settlements, trading posts, forts and ports in the Sub-Saharan Africa's coast. Cities, towns and villages were founded all over East African territories by the Portuguese, especially since the 19th century, like Lourenço Marques, Beira, Vila Pery, Vila Junqueiro, Vila Cabral and Porto Amélia. Others were expanded and developed greatly under Portuguese rule, like Quelimane, Nampula and Sofala. By this time, Mozambique had become a Portuguese colony, but administration was left to the trading companies (like Mozambique Company and Niassa Company) who had received long-term leases from Lisbon. By the mid-1920s, the Portuguese succeeded in creating a highly exploitative and coercive settler economy, in which African natives were forced to work on the fertile lands taken over by Portuguese settlers. Major cash crops included cotton, cashews, tea and rice. Thereafter, Mozambique, along with other Portuguese colonies, was put under the direct control of Lisbon. In 1951, it became an overseas province. The economy expanded rapidly during the 1950s and 1960s, attracting thousands of Portuguese settlers to the country. It was around this time that the first nationalist guerrilla groups began to form in Tanzania and other African countries. The strong industrial and agricultural development that did occur throughout the 1950s, 1960s and early 1970s was based on Portuguese development plans, and also included British and South African investmentIn 1959–60, Mozambique's major exports included cotton, cashew nuts, tea, sugar, copra and sisal. Other major agricultural productions included rice and coconut. The expanding economy of the Portuguese overseas province was fuelled by foreign direct investment, and public investment which included ambitious state-managed development plans. British capital owned two of the large sugar concessions (the third was Portuguese), including the famous Sena states. The Matola Oil Refinery, Procon, was controlled by Britain and the United States. In 1948 the petroleum concession was given to the Mozambique Gulf Oil Company. At Maotize coal was mined; the industry was chiefly financed by Belgian capital. 60% of the capital of the   was held by the  , 30% by the Mozambique Company, and the remaining 10% by the Government of the territory. Nine out of the twenty-three insurance companies were Portuguese. 80% of life assurance was in the hands of foreign companies which testifies to the openness of the economy.  The Portuguese overseas province of Mozambique was the first territory of Portugal, including the European mainland, to distribute Coca-Cola. Lately the   Oil Refinery was established by the   (SONAREP) — a Franco-Portuguese syndicate. In the sisal plantations Swiss capital was invested, and in copra concerns, a combination of Portuguese, Swiss and French capital was invested. In 1971 construction work of the Massingir Dam began. Indeed, in 1973, value added in manufacturing was the sixth highest in Sub-Saharan AfricaEconomically, Mozambique was a source of agricultural raw materials and an earner of foreign exchange. It also provided a market for Portuguese manufacturers which were protected from local competition. Transportation facilities had been developed to exploit the transit trade of South Africa, Swaziland, Rhodesia, Malawi, and Zambia, agricultural production for export purposes had been encouraged, and profitable arrangements for the export of labour had been made with neighbouring countries. The economic structure generally favoured the taking of profits to Portugal rather than their reinvestment in Mozambique. The Portuguese interests which dominate in banking, industry, and agriculture, exerted a powerful influence on policy. Education  Mozambique's rural black populations were largely illiterate, as were a majority of Portugal's peasantry. However, a number of natives from diverse tribal backgrounds were educated in Portuguese language and history by several missionary schools established across the vast countryside areas. In mainland Portugal, the homeland of the colonial authorities which ruled Mozambique from the 16th century until 1975, by the end of the 19th century the illiteracy rates were at over 80 percent and higher education was reserved for a small percentage of the population. 681 percent of mainland Portugal's population was still classified as illiterate by the 1930 census. Mainland Portugal's literacy rate by the 1940s and early 1950s was low for North American and Western European standards at the time. Only in the mid-1960s did the country make public education available for all children between the ages of six and twelve, and the overseas territories in Africa profited from this new educational developments and change in policy at Lisbon. Starting in the early 1950s, the access to basic, secondary and technical education was expanded and its availability was being increasingly opened to both the African   and the European Portuguese of the African territories. A comprehensive network of secondary schools (the  ) and technical or vocational education schools were implemented across the cities and main towns of the territory. In 1962, the first Mozambican university was founded by the Portuguese authorities in the provincial capital,  , the  , awarding a wide range of degrees from engineering to medicine,  during a time that in the European Portuguese mainland only four public universities were in operation. This period was a time of city and town expansion and modernization that included the construction of several sports facilities for football, rink hockey, basketball, volleyball, handball, athletics, gymnastics and swimming. Several sportsmen, especially football players, that achieved wide notability in Portuguese sports were from Mozambique. Eusébio and Mário Coluna were examples of that, and excelled in the Portugal national football team. Since the 1960s, with the latest developments on commercial aviation, the highest ranked football teams of Mozambique and the other African overseas provinces of Portugal, started to compete in the   (the Portuguese Cup). Opened in 1968, it was at the time the most advanced in Mozambique conforming to standards set by both FIFA and the Union Cycliste Internationale (UCI). The cycling track could be adjusted to allow for 20,000 more seats.  Beginning in the 1950s, motorsport was introduced to Mozambique. The initial surface of the new track, named   did not provide enough grip and an accident in the late 1960s killed 8 people and injured many more. Therefore, in 1970, the track was renovated and the surface changed to meet the highest international safety requirements that were needed at large events with many spectators.  Carnation Revolution and independence  As communist and anti-colonial ideologies spread out across Africa, many clandestine political movements were established in support of Mozambique's independence. Regardless of whether it was exaggerated anti-Portuguese / anti-"Colonial" propaganda,  a dominant tendency in Mozambique, or a mix of both, these movements claimed that since policies and development plans were primarily designed by the ruling authorities for the benefit of the Mozambican ethnic Portuguese population, little attention was paid to local tribal integration and the development of its native communities. According to the official guerrilla statements, this affected a majority of the indigenous population who suffered both state-sponsored discrimination and enormous social pressure. Many felt they had received too little opportunity or resources to upgrade their skills and improve their economic and social situation to a degree comparable to that of the Europeans. Several African territories under European rule had achieved independence in recent decades. Oliveira Salazar attempted to resist this tide and maintain the integrity of the Portuguese empire. By 1970, the anti-guerrilla war in Africa was consuming an important part of the Portuguese budget and there was no sign of a final solution in sight. This year was marked by a large-scale military operation in northern Mozambique, the Gordian Knot Operation, which displaced the FRELIMO's bases and destroyed much of the guerrillas' military capacity. At a military level, a part of Guinea-Bissau was de facto independent since 1973, but the capital and the major towns were still under Portuguese control. In Angola and Mozambique, independence movements were only active in a few remote countryside areas from where the Portuguese Army had retreated. However, their impending presence and the fact that they wouldn't go away dominated public anxiety. Throughout the war period Portugal faced increasing dissent, arms embargoes and other punitive sanctions imposed by most of the international community. For the Portuguese society the war was becoming even more unpopular due to its length and financial costs, the worsening of diplomatic relations with other United Nations members, and the role it had always played as a factor of perpetuation of the   regime. It was this escalation that would lead directly to the mutiny of members of the FAP in the Carnation Revolution in 1974 – an event that would lead to the independence of the former Portuguese colonies in Africa. A leftist military coup in Lisbon on 24 April 1974 by the   (MFA), overthrew the Estado Novo regime headed by Prime Minister Marcelo CaetanoAs one of the objectives of the MFA, all the Portuguese overseas territories in Africa were offered independence. FRELIMO took complete control of the Mozambican territory after a transition period, as agreed in the Lusaka Accord which recognized Mozambique's right to independence and the terms of the transfer of powerWithin a year of the Portuguese military coup at Lisbon, almost all Portuguese population had left the African territory as refugees (in mainland Portugal they were known as  ) – some expelled by the new ruling power of Mozambique, some fleeing in fear. Most city streets, named for Portuguese heroes or important dates in Portuguese history, had their names changed. Portuguese population's rapid exodus left the Mozambican economy in disarray. In addition, after the independence day on 25 June 1975, the eruption of the Mozambican Civil War (1977–92) destroyed the remaining wealth and left the former Portuguese Overseas Province in a state of absolute disrepair. "Area Handbook for Mozambique", US Government Printing Office. 

The Abyss<====>45568<====>The Abyss    The Abyss is a 1989 American science fiction film written and directed by Canadian director James Cameron, starring Ed Harris, Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio, and Michael Biehn. Deep in the ocean, they encounter something unexpected. The film was released on August 9, 1989, and grossed $90 million.  It won the Academy Award for Best Visual Effects and was nominated for three more Academy awards. Ohio-class submarine USS Montana has an encounter with an unidentified submerged object and sinks near the Cayman Trough. Coffey, the SEAL team leader, is ordered to accelerate their mission and to take one of the mini-subs without Deep Core s permission and recover a Trident missile warhead from the Montana, just as the storm hits above. The Benthic Explorer, to which Deep Core is tethered, is rocked by the storm, and the cable crane is torn from the ship. The rig is partially flooded, killing several crew members and damaging its power systems. Coffey shows little remorse when he and his SEALs return to the damaged baseThe crew wait out the storm so they can restore communications and be rescued. As the crew struggles against the cold, they find an NTI has formed an animated column of water and is exploring the base. Though they treat it with curiosity, Coffey is agitated by it and cuts it in half by closing a pressure bulkhead on it, causing it to retreat. The crew soon realize that Coffey is suffering paranoia from high-pressure nervous syndrome. Spying on him through a remote operated vehicle, they find he and another SEAL are arming the warhead to attack the NTIs, and race to stop him. Bud fights Coffey but Coffey escapes in a mini-sub with the primed warhead, and Bud and Lindsey give chase in the other sub. Coffey is able to launch the warhead into the trench, but his sub is damaged and drifts over the edge of the trough, and he is crushed when the sub implodes from high pressures. The other mini-sub is also damaged and is taking on water; with only one functional diving suit, Lindsey opts to enter deep hypothermia when the ocean's cold water engulfs her, and Bud swims back with her body to the platform. There, he and the crew administer CPR and revive her, and Bud and Lindsey reaffirm their lost loveOne SEAL, unaware of Coffey's plan at the time, helps to locate the warhead, stopped on a ledge several thousand feet down the trench. Bud volunteers to use an experimental diving suit equipped with a liquid breathing apparatus to survive to that depth, though he will only be able to communicate through a keypad on the suit. Bud begins his dive, assisted by Lindsey's voice keeping him coherent against the effects of the mounting pressure, and reaches the warhead. With nearly no oxygen left in the system, Bud types out that he knew this was a one-way trip, and tells Lindsey he loves her. As he waits for death, an NTI approaches Bud and takes his hand. He is guided to an alien ship deeper in the trench. Deep inside, the NTI creates an atmospheric pocket for Bud, allowing him to breathe normally. The base shakes and lights from the trench bring the arrival of the alien ship. It rises to the ocean's surface, with Deep Core and several of the surface ships run aground on its hull. The crew of Deep Core leave the platform, surprised they are not suffering from decompression sickness, when they see Bud walking out of the alien ship, and Lindsey races to hug Bud. Special EditionIn the extended version, the events in the film are played against a backdrop of conflict between the United States and the Soviet Union, with the potential for all-out war; the sinking of the Montana additionally fuels the aggression. There is more conflict between Bud and Lindsey in regards to their former relationship. The primary addition is the ending: when Bud is taken to the alien ship, they start by showing him images of war and aggression from news sources around the globe. The aliens then create massive megatsunamis that threaten the world's coasts, but stop them short before they hit. They then show Bud his message to Lindsey, and let the megatsunamis disperse without damage, as a warning to humanity. Cast  Ed Harris as Virgil "Bud" Brigman, Deep Core's foreman and Lindsey's estranged husband. Lindsey Brigman, designer of the rig and Bud's estranged wife. Michael Biehn as US Navy SEAL Lieutenant Hiram Coffey, the commander of the Navy SEAL team. Quinn as Arliss "Sonny" Dawson Leo Burmester as Catfish De Vries, a worker on the rig and a Vietnam veteran Marine who is skeptical of the SEALs. Kimberly Scott as Lisa "One Night" Standing Todd Graff as Alan "Hippy" Carnes, a conspiracy theorist who believes that the NTIs have been covered up by the CIA. He carries a pet rat on his shoulder. John Bedford Lloyd as Jammer Willis Chris Elliott as Bendix Capt. Wells was the first to introduce the notion of a sea alien in his 1897 short story In the Abyss.   He subsequently wrote a short story    that focused on a group of scientists in a laboratory at the bottom of the ocean. The basic idea did not change, but many of the details evolved over the years. Once Cameron arrived in Hollywood, he quickly realized that a group of scientists was not that commercial and changed it to a group of blue-collar workers.  While making Aliens, Cameron saw a National Geographic film about remote operated vehicles operating deep in the North Atlantic Ocean. These images reminded him of his short story.  He and producer Gale Anne Hurd decided that The Abyss would be their next film.  Cameron wrote a treatment combined with elements of a shooting script, which generated a lot of interest in Hollywood.  Cameron and Hurd were married before The Abyss, separated during pre-production, and divorced in February 1989, two months after principal photography.    Pre-productionThe cast and crew trained for underwater diving for one week in the Cayman Islands.    This was necessary because 40% of all live-action principal photography took place underwater. Furthermore, Cameron's production company had to design and build experimental equipment and develop a state-of-the-art communications system that allowed the director to talk underwater to the actors and dialogue to be recorded directly onto tape for the first time. Cameron had originally planned to shoot on location in the Bahamas where the story was set but quickly realized that he needed to have a completely controlled environment because of the stunts and special visual effects involved.  He considered shooting the film in Malta, which had the largest unfiltered tank of water, but it was not adequate for Cameron's needs.  Underwater sequences for the film were shot at a unit of the Gaffney Studios, situated outside Gaffney, South Carolina, which had been abandoned by Duke Power officials after previously spending $700 million constructing the Cherokee Nuclear Power Plant, along Owensby Street, Gaffney, South Carolina. Two specially constructed tanks were used. The first one, based on the abandoned plant's primary reactor containment vessel, held   of water, was 55 feet (18 m) deep and 209 feet (70 m) across. At the time, it was the largest fresh-water filtered tank in the world. Additional scenes were shot in the second tank, an unused turbine pit, which held   of water.  As the production crew rushed to finish painting the main tank, millions of gallons of water poured in and took five days to fill.  The Deepcore rig was anchored to a 90-ton concrete column at the bottom of the large tank. It consisted of six partial and complete modules that took over half a year to plan and build from scratch. Can-Dive Services Ltd, a Canadian commercial diving company that specialized in saturation diving systems and underwater technology, specially manufactured the two working craft (Flatbed and Cab One) for the film. Two million dollars was spent on set construction. Filming was also done at the largest underground lake in the world—a mine in Bonne Terre, Missouri, which was the background for several underwater shots.   Principal photographyThe main tank was not ready in time for the first day of principal photography. Cameron delayed filming for a week and pushed the smaller tank's schedule forward, demanding that it be ready weeks ahead of schedule.  Filming eventually began on August 15, 1988, but there were still problems. On the first day of shooting in the main water tank, it sprang a leak and   of water a minute rushed out. In addition, enormous pipes with elbow fittings had been improperly installed. There was so much water pressure in them that the elbows blew off. Cameron's choice of cinematographer on the movie was Mikael Salomon—a US-based Danish national who would go on to work on other blockbusters such as Backdraft and Arachnophobia before moving into the director's slot on a myriad of films and TV shows including two editions of the acclaimed HBO WW2 series Band of Brothers. Salomon used three cameras in watertight housings that were specially designed.  Another special housing was designed for scenes that went from above-water dialogue to below-water dialogue. The filmmakers had to figure out how to keep the water clear enough to shoot and dark enough to look realistic at 2,000 feet (700 m), which was achieved by floating a thick layer of plastic beads in the water and covering the top of the tank with an enormous tarpaulin.  Cameron wanted to see the actors' faces and hear their dialogue, and thus hired Western Space and Marine to engineer helmets which would remain optically clear underwater and installed state-of-the-art aircraft quality microphones into each helmet. Safety conditions were also a major factor with the installation of a decompression chamber on site, along with a diving bell and a safety diver for each actor. The breathing fluid used in the film actually exists but has only been thoroughly investigated in animals.    Over the previous 20 years it had been tested on several animals, who survived. The rat shown in the film was actually breathing fluid and survived unharmed, although the scene was censored in Britain for perceived cruelty to animals. Ed Harris did not actually breathe the fluid. He held his breath inside a helmet full of liquid while being towed 30 feet (10 m) below the surface of the large tank.  Actors played their scenes at 33 feet (11 m), too shallow a depth for them to need decompression, and rarely stayed down for more than an hour at a time. Cameron and the 26-person underwater diving crew sank to 50 feet (17 m) and stayed down for five hours at a time. To avoid decompression sickness, they would have to hang from hoses halfway up the tank for as long as two hours, breathing pure oxygen. The cast and crew endured over six months of grueling six-day, 70-hour weeks on an isolated set. At one point, Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio had a physical and emotional breakdown on the set and on another occasion, Ed Harris burst into spontaneous sobbing while driving home. Cameron himself admitted, "I knew this was going to be a hard shoot, but even I had no idea just how hard. I don't ever want to go through this again".  For example, for the scene where portions of the rig are flooded with water, he realized that he initially did not know how to minimize the sequence's inherent danger. It took him more than four hours to set up the shot safely.  Actor Leo Burmester said, "Shooting The Abyss has been the hardest thing I've ever done. Jim Cameron is the type of director who pushes you to the edge, but he doesn't make you do anything he wouldn't do himself"  A lightning storm caused a 200-foot (65 m) tear in the black tarpaulin covering the main tank.  Repairing it would have taken too much time, so the production began shooting at night.  In addition, blooming algae often reduced visibility to 20 feet (6 m) within hours. Over-chlorination led to divers' skin burning and exposed hair being stripped off or turning white. As production went on, the slow pace and daily mental and physical strain of filming began to wear on the cast and crew. Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio remembered, "We never started and finished any one scene in any one day".  At one point, Cameron told the actors to relieve themselves in their wetsuits to save time between takes.  While filming one of many takes of Mastrantonio's character's resuscitation scene—in which she was soaking wet, topless and repeatedly being slapped and pounded on the chest—the camera ran out of film, prompting Mastrantonio to storm off the set yelling, "We are not animals!" For some shots in the scene that focus on Ed Harris, he was yelling at thin air because Mastrantonio refused to film the scene again. Michael Biehn also grew frustrated by the waiting. He claimed that he was in South Carolina for five months and only acted for three to four weeks.  He remembered one day being ten meters underwater and "suddenly the lights went out. It was so black I couldn't see my hand. I realized I might not get out of there" Harris recalled: "One day we were all in our dressing rooms and people began throwing couches out the windows and smashing the walls.  Before the film's release, there were reports from South Carolina that Ed Harris was so upset by the physical demands of the film and Cameron's dictatorial directing style that he said he would refuse to help promote the motion picture. Harris later denied this rumor and helped promote the film.  But after its release and initial promotion, Harris publicly refused to ever again discuss the film, saying "I'm never talking about it and never will" Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio has also since brushed off the film, commenting, "The Abyss was a lot of things. Phil Tippett suggested Cameron contact Industrial Light & Magic.  The special visual effects work was divided up among seven FX divisions with motion control work by Dream Quest Images and computer graphics and opticals by ILM.  ILM designed a program to produce surface waves of differing sizes and kinetic properties for the pseudopod.  For the moment where it mimics Bud and Lindsey's faces, Ed Harris had eight of his facial expressions scanned while twelve of Mastrantonio's were scanned via software used to create computer-generated sculptures. The set was photographed from every angle and digitally recreated so that the pseudopod could be accurately composited into the live-action footage.  The company spent six months to create 75 seconds of computer graphics needed for the creature. The film was to have opened on July 4, 1989, but its release was delayed for more than a month by production and special effects problems.  The animated sequences were supervised by ILM animation director Wes Takahashi. Studio executives were nervous about the film's commercial prospects when preview audiences laughed at scenes of serious intent. Industry insiders said that the release delay was because nervous executives ordered the film's ending completely re-shot. There was also the question of the size of the film's budget: 20th Century Fox stated that the budget was $43 million,    a figure Cameron himself has reiterated.  However, estimates put the figure higher with The New York Times estimating the cost at $45 million    and one executive claiming it cost $47 million,    while box office revenue tracker website The Numbers lists the production budget at $70 million. The Abyss budget/box office details at The-Numberscom  Reception  Box officeThe Abyss was  released on August 9, 1989, in 1,533 theaters, where it grossed $93 million on its opening weekend and ranked #2 at the box office. It went on to make $545 million in North America and $355 million throughout the rest of the world for a worldwide total of $90 million. The critical consensus states: "The utterly gorgeous special effects frequently overshadow the fact that The Abyss is also a totally gripping, claustrophobic thriller, complete with an interesting crew of characters"  On Metacritic, the film has an average score of 62 out of 100, based on 14 critics indicating "generally favorable reviews".  The reviews tallied therein are for both the theatrical release and the Special EditionNewsweek magazine's David Ansen, summarizing the theatrical release, wrote, "The payoff to The Abyss is pretty damn silly — a portentous deus ex machina that leaves too many questions unanswered and evokes too many other films"    In her review for The New York Times, Caryn James claimed that the film had "at least four endings," and "by the time the last ending of this two-and-a-quarter-hour film comes along, the effect is like getting off a demon roller coaster that has kept racing several laps after you were ready to get off"    Chris Dafoe, in his review for The Globe and Mail, wrote, "At its best, The Abyss offers a harrowing, thrilling journey through inky waters and high tension. In the end, however, this torpedo turns out to be a dud—it swerves at the last minute, missing its target and exploding ineffectually in a flash of fantasy and fairy-tale schtick"   While praising the film's first two hours as "compelling", the Toronto Star remarked, "But when Cameron takes the adventure to the next step, deep into the heart of fantasy, it all becomes one great big deja boo. But the dopey wrap-up sinks the rest 20,000 leagues"    In her review for The Washington Post, Rita Kempley wrote that the film "asks us to believe that the drowned return to life, that the comatose come to the rescue, that driven women become doting wives, that Neptune cares about landlubbers. I'd sooner believe that Moby Dick could swim up the drainpipe"    Halliwell's Film Guide claimed the film was "despite some clever special effects, a tedious, overlong fantasy that is more excited by machinery than people"  Conversely, Rolling Stone magazine's Peter Travers enthused, "[The Abyss is] the greatest underwater adventure ever filmed, the most consistently enthralling of the summer blockbusters…one of the best pictures of the year"   The release of the Special Edition in 1993 garnered much praise. Each giving it thumbs up, Siskel remarked, "The Abyss has been improved," and Ebert added, "It makes the film seem more well rounded"  In the book Reel Views 2, James Berardinelli comments, "James Cameron's The Abyss may be the most extreme example of an available movie that demonstrates how the vision of a director, once fully realized on screen, can transform a good motion picture into a great one"  AccoladesThe Abyss won the 1990 Oscar for Best Visual Effects (John Bruno, Dennis Muren, Hoyt Yeatman, and Dennis Skotak). Cleary, Richard Overton and Lee Orloff)The studio unsuccessfully lobbied hard to get Michael Biehn nominated for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor. Many other film organizations, such as the Academy of Science Fiction, Fantasy & Horror Films, and the American Society of Cinematographers, also nominated The Abyss. The film ended up winning a total of three other awards from these organizations.   Deluxe EditionVarese Sarabande, which released the original album, issued a limited-edition (3,000 copies), two-disc album in 2014 featuring the complete scoreDisc One:  Opening Title (:42)   Montana / Crash / Flood (2:01)   Marker Buoy / They’re Coming (1:17) Let Me Drown Your Rat / Search The Montana (10:09)   Jammer Freaks (3:30)   He’s Convulsing (1:14) MIRV Recovery / SEALs Return (2:03)   Crashing Crane (2:08)   What A Drag (2:01)   The Draggiest Man (1:22) Lindsey’s Close Encounter (6:23)   Here’s MIRV / Some Huevos (2:27)   Have To Take Steps / Jarhead Is Watching (1:13)   The Pseudopod (5:35)   Coffey Break (1:56)   Freeze (3:40) Bud And Cat Dive / Click (:59)   The Fight (1:52)   What A Drag (Original) (6:05)  Disc Two: Tracks 10-19 are bonus tracks.  Coffey Implodes (1:09)   The Only Way (7:49)   Resurrection (2:00)   Bud’s Big Dive (6:40)   Defusing The Bomb (2:17) Bud On The Ledge (3:12)   Bud Reborn / Blinky Bows (3:22)   Back On The Air (1:47)   Finale And End Credits (4:47) Opening Title (Demo) (:43)   Flood And Sinking (Alternate) / Unused Synth Cue (1:01)   Crashing Crane (Alternate) (2:08) What A Drag (Wild Original) (4:33)   Some Huevos (Alternate) (1:19)   The Pseudopod (Alternate) (5:33)   The Fight (Alternate) (1:51) The Only Way (Alternate) (4:54)   Lindsey Dies (Alternate) (1:05)   Vocal Insert (:56)   History of the Special EditionEven as the film was in the first weeks of its 1989 theatrical release, rumors were circulating of a wave sequence missing from the film's end. As chronicled in the 1993 LaserDisc Special Edition release and later in the 2000 DVD, the pressure to cut the film's running time stemmed from both distribution concerns and Industrial Light & Magic's then-inability to complete the required sequences. From the distributor's perspective, the looming three-hour length limited the number of times the film could be shown each day, assuming that audiences would be willing to sit through the entire film, though 1990's Dances with Wolves would shatter both industry-held notions. Further, test audience screenings revealed a surprisingly mixed reaction to the sequences as they appeared in their unfinished form; in post-screening surveys, they dominated both the "Scenes I liked most" and "Scenes I liked least" fields. Contrary to speculation, studio meddling was not the cause of the shortened length; Cameron held final cut as long as the film met a running time of roughly two hours and 15 minutes. He later noted, "Ironically, the studio brass were horrified when I said I was cutting the wave"  What emerges in the winnowing process is only the best stuff. And I think the overall caliber of the film is improved by that. I cut only two minutes of Terminator. On Aliens, we took out much more. I even reconstituted some of that in a special (TV) release versionThe sense of something being missing on Aliens was greater for me than on The Abyss, where the film just got consistently better as the cut got along. The film must function as a dramatic, organic whole. When I cut the film together, things that read well on paper, on a conceptual level, didn't necessarily translate to the screen as well. I felt I was losing something by breaking my focus. Breaking the story's focus and coming off the main characters was a far greater detriment to the film than what was gained. The film keeps the same message intact at a thematic level, not at a really overt level, by working in a symbolic way. Starlog, Issue 150, interview by Ian Spelling   Cameron elected to remove the sequences along with other, shorter scenes elsewhere in the film, reducing the running time from roughly two hours and 50 minutes to two hours and 20 minutes and diminishing his signature themes of nuclear peril and disarmament. Subsequent test audience screenings drew substantially better reactionsStar Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio publicly expressed regret about some of the scenes selected for removal from the film's theatrical cut: "There were some beautiful scenes that were taken out. I just wish we hadn't shot so much that isn't in the film" Shortly after the film's premiere, Cameron and video editor Ed Marsh created a longer video cut of The Abyss for their own use that incorporated dailies. With the tremendous success of Cameron's Terminator 2: Judgment Day in 1991, Lightstorm Entertainment secured a five-year, $500 million financing deal with 20th Century Fox for films produced, directed or written by Cameron.  The contract allocated roughly $500,000 of the amount to complete The Abyss.  ILM was commissioned to finish the work they had started three years earlier, with many of the same people who had worked on it originallyThe CGI tools developed for Terminator 2: Judgment Day allowed ILM to complete the rumored tidal-wave sequence, as well as correcting flaws in rendering for all their other work done for the filmThe tidal wave sequence had originally been designed by ILM as a physical effect, using a plastic wave, but Cameron was dissatisfied with the end result, and the sequence was scrapped. By the time Cameron was ready to revisit The Abyss, ILM's CGI prowess had finally progressed to an appropriate level, and the wave was rendered as a CGI effect. Terminator 2: Judgment Day screenwriter and frequent Cameron collaborator William Wisher had a cameo in the scene as a reporter in Santa Monica who catches the first tidal wave on cameraWhen it was discovered that original production sound recordings had been lost, new dialogue and foley were recorded, but since Captain Kidd Brewer had died of a self-inflicted gunshot  before he could return to re-loop his dialog, producers and editors had to lift his original dialogue tracks from the remaining optical-sound prints of the dailies. The Special Edition was therefore dedicated to his memory as a resultAs Alan Silvestri was not available to compose new music for the restored scenes, Robert Garrett, who had composed temporary music for the film's initial cutting in 1989, was chosen to create new music. The Special Edition was completed in December 1992, with 28 minutes added to the film, and saw a limited theatrical release in New York City and Los Angeles on February 26, 1993, and expanded to key cities nationwide in the following weeksOn home video, in addition to the conventional two-tape VHS release, the first THX-certified LaserDisc title of the Special Edition Box Set was released in May 1993 and was a best-seller for the rest of the year. Both the theatrical and SE editions remain available on DVD; however, all available DVDs are non-anamorphic, with the exception of the Chinese DVD produced for Region 6 by Excel MediaWhile promoting the upcoming 30th-anniversary Blu-ray release of Aliens at Comic-Con in San Diego July 2016 James Cameron has confirmed that he is working on a remastered 4K transfer of The Abyss and it will be released on Blu-ray for the first time in early 2017Cameron added, "We've done a wet-gate 4K scan of the original negative, and it's going to look insanely good. We're going to do an authoring pass in the DI for Blu-ray and HDR at the same time"It is unknown whether both the theatrical and special-edition versions will be included. As of 2018, the Blu-ray is yet to be released. AdaptationsScience-fiction author Orson Scott Card was hired to write a novelization of the film based on the screenplay and discussions with Cameron.  He wrote back-stories for Bud, Lindsey, and Coffey as a means not only of helping the actors define their roles, but also to justify some of their behavior and mannerisms in the film. Card also wrote the aliens as a colonizing species which preferentially sought high-pressure deep-water worlds to build their ships as they traveled further into the galaxy (their mothership was in orbit on the far side of the moon). The NTIs' knowledge of neuroanatomy and nanoscale manipulation of biochemistry was responsible for many of the deus ex machina aspects of the filmA licensed interactive fiction video game based on the script was being developed for Infocom by Bob Bates, but was cancelled when Infocom was shut down by its then-parent company Activision. Bob Bates interview at Adventure Classic Gaming  Sound Source Interactive later created an action video game entitled The Abyss: Incident at Europa. The game takes place a few years after the film, where the player must find a cure for a deadly virus.  See also  Project Azorian List of films featuring the United States Navy SEALs The Kraken Wakes features deep sea alien activity, albeit in a hostile capacity.   References  External links Abyss set visit at Gaffney by two fans Abyss set pictures at Gaffney with both air and ground shots Siskel & Ebert review of the Special Edition release on Laserdisc. 

Dedekind cut<====>45569<====>Dedekind cutIn mathematics, a Dedekind cut is а method of construction of the real numbers. It is a partition of the rational numbers into two non-empty sets A and B, such that all elements of A are less than all elements of B, and A contains no greatest element. Dedekind cuts were introduced by Richard Dedekind, but a similar construction was used in Euclid's Elements (book V, definition 5) to define proportional segmentsThe set B may or may not have a smallest element among the rationals. If B has a smallest element among the rationals, the cut corresponds to that rational. In other words, A contains every rational number less than the cut, and B contains every rational number greater than or equal to the cut. An irrational cut is equated to an irrational number which is in neither set. Every real number, rational or not, is equated to one and only one cut of rationals. More generally, a Dedekind cut is a partition of a totally ordered set into two non-empty parts A and B, such that A is closed downwards (meaning that for all a in A, x ≤ a implies that x is in A as well) and B is closed upwards, and A contains no greatest element. See also completeness (order theory)It is straightforward to show that a Dedekind cut among the real numbers is uniquely defined by the corresponding cut among the rational numbers. Similarly, every cut of reals is identical to the cut produced by a specific real number (which can be identified as the smallest element of the B set). In other words, the number line where every real number is defined as a Dedekind cut of rationals is a complete continuum without any further gaps. Representations It is more symmetrical to use the (A,B) notation for Dedekind cuts, but each of A and B does determine the other. In this case, we say that b is represented by the cut (A,B)The important purpose of the Dedekind cut is to work with number sets that are not complete. The cut itself can represent a number not in the original collection of numbers (most often rational numbers). Even though there is no rational value for  , if the rational numbers are partitioned into A and B this way, the partition itself represents an irrational number. In this way, set inclusion can be used to represent the ordering of numbers, and all other relations (greater than, less than or equal to, equal to, and so on) can be similarly created from set relationsThe set of all Dedekind cuts is itself a linearly ordered set (of sets). Moreover, the set of Dedekind cuts has the least-upper-bound property, ie, every nonempty subset of it that has any upper bound has a least upper bound.  Thus, constructing the set of Dedekind cuts serves the purpose of embedding the original ordered set S, which might not have had the least-upper-bound property, within a (usually larger) linearly ordered set that does have this useful property.   This cut represents the irrational number   in Dedekind's construction. To establish this truly, one must show that this really is a cut and that it is the square root of two. However, neither claim is immediate. The choice  y=\frac{2x+2}{x+2}  works. Then we have a cut and it has a square no larger than 2, but to show equality requires showing that if r is any rational number less than 2, then there is positive x in A with  Note that the equality   cannot hold since   is not rational. GeneralizationsA construction similar to Dedekind cuts is used for the construction of surreal numbers. The notion of complete lattice generalizes the least-upper-bound property of the realsOne completion of S is the set of its downwardly closed subsets, ordered by inclusion. (These operators form a Galois connection) Then the Dedekind–MacNeille completion of S consists of all subsets A for which (A u ) l  = A; it is ordered by inclusion. Also available at Project Gutenberg. 

DNA vaccination<====>45570<====>DNA vaccination DNA vaccination is a technique for protecting against disease by injection with genetically engineered DNA so cells directly produce an antigen, producing a protective immunological response. DNA vaccines have potential advantages over conventional vaccines, including the ability to induce a wider range of immune response typesSeveral DNA vaccines are available for veterinary use. Currently no DNA vaccines have been approved for human use. Research is investigating the approach for viral, bacterial and parasitic diseases in humans, as well as for several cancers.   History Vaccines have eliminated naturally occurring smallpox, and nearly eliminated polio, while other diseases, such as typhus, rotavirus, hepatitis A and B and others are well controlled. Conventional vaccines cover a small number of diseases, while other infections kill millions of people every year. Whole organismFirst generation vaccines are whole-organism vaccines – either live and weakened, or killed forms.    Live, attenuated vaccines, such as smallpox and polio vaccines, are able to induce killer T-cell (T C  or CTL) responses, helper T-cell (T H ) responses and antibody immunity. However, attenuated forms of a pathogen can convert to a dangerous form and may cause disease in immunocompromised vaccine recipients (such as those with AIDS). While killed vaccines do not have this risk, they cannot generate specific killer T cell responses and may not work at all for some diseases.  SubunitSecond generation vaccines were developed to reduce the risks from live vaccines. These are subunit vaccines, consisting of specific protein antigens (such as tetanus or diphtheria toxoid) or recombinant protein components (such as the hepatitis B surface antigen). They can generate T H  and antibody responses, but not killer T cell responses. DNADNA vaccines are third generation vaccines. They contain DNA that codes for specific proteins (antigens) from a pathogen. The DNA is injected into cells, whose "inner machinery" uses the DNA to synthesize the proteins. Because these proteins are recognised as foreign, when they are processed by the host cells and displayed on their surface, the immune system is alerted, which then triggers immune responses.    Alternatively, the DNA may be encapsulated in protein to facilitate cell entry. If this capsid protein is included in the DNA, the resulting vaccine can combine the potency of a live vaccine without reversion risks. In 1983, Enzo Paoletti and Dennis Panicali at the New York Department of Health devised a strategy to produce recombinant DNA vaccines by using genetic engineering to transform ordinary smallpox vaccine into vaccines that may be able to prevent other diseases.  They altered the DNA of cowpox virus by inserting a gene from other viruses (namely Herpes simplex virus, hepatitis B and influenza).  In 2016 a DNA vaccine for the Zika virus began testing at the National Institutes of Health. Separately, Inovio Pharmaceuticals and GeneOne Life Science began tests of a different DNA vaccine against Zika in Miami. The NIH vaccine is injected into the upper arm under high pressure. Manufacturing the vaccines in volume remains unsolved.  Applications   No DNA vaccines have been approved for human use in the United States. Few experimental trials have evoked a response strong enough to protect against disease and the technique's usefulness remains to be proven in humans. A veterinary DNA vaccine to protect horses from West Nile virus has been approved. Advantages And Disadvantages Of Nucleic Acid-Based Immunization Advantages  Disadvantages    No risk for infection  Antigen presentation by both MHC class I and class II molecules  Polarise T-cell response toward type 1 or type 2  Immune response focused on antigen of interest Ease of development and production  Stability for storage and shipping Cost-effectiveness Obviates need for peptide synthesis, expression and purification of recombinant proteins and use of toxic adjuvants    Long-term persistence of immunogen  In vivo expression ensures protein more closely resembles normal eukaryotic structure, with accompanying post-translational modificationsLimited to protein immunogens (not useful for non-protein based antigens such as bacterial polysaccharides) Risk of affecting genes controlling cell growth Possibility of inducing antibody production against DNA Possibility of tolerance to the antigen (protein) produced Potential for atypical processing of bacterial and parasite proteinsPlasmid vectors  Vector design DNA vaccines elicit the best immune response when highly active expression vectors are used. These are plasmids that usually consist of a strong viral promoter to drive the in vivo transcription and translation of the gene (or complementary DNA) of interest.    Intron A may sometimes be included to improve mRNA stability and hence increase protein expression.    Plasmids also include a strong polyadenylation/transcriptional termination signal, such as bovine growth hormone or rabbit beta-globulin polyadenylation sequences. Polycistronic vectors (ones located at multiple genome sites) are sometimes constructed to express more than one immunogen, or to express an immunogen and an immunostimulatory protein.   Because the plasmid is the “vehicle” from which the immunogen is expressed, optimising vector design for maximal protein expression is essential.  One way of enhancing protein expression is by optimising the codon usage of pathogenic mRNAs for eukaryotic cells. Pathogens often have different AT-contents than the target species, so altering the gene sequence of the immunogen to reflect the codons more commonly used in the target species may improve its expression.   Another consideration is the choice of promoter. The SV40 promoter was conventionally used until research showed that vectors driven by the Rous Sarcoma Virus (RSV) promoter had much higher expression rates.  More recently, expression rates have been further increased by the use of the cytomegalovirus (CMV) immediate early promoter. Inclusion of the Mason-Pfizer monkey virus (MPV)-CTE with/without rev increased envelope expression. Furthermore, the CTE+rev construct was significantly more immunogenic than CTE-alone vector.    Additional modifications to improve expression rates include the insertion of enhancer sequences, synthetic introns, adenovirus tripartite leader (TPL) sequences and modifications to the polyadenylation and transcriptional termination sequences.  An example of DNA vaccine plasmid is pVAC, which uses SV40 promoterStructural instability phenomena are of particular concern for plasmid manufacture, DNA vaccination and gene therapy.  Accessory regions pertaining to the plasmid backbone may engage in a wide range of structural instability phenomena. Well-known catalysts of genetic instability include direct, inverted and tandem repeats, which are conspicuous in many commercially available cloning and expression vectors. Therefore, the reduction or complete elimination of extraneous noncoding backbone sequences would pointedly reduce the propensity for such events to take place and consequently the overall plasmid's recombinogenic potential.  Mechanism of plasmidsOnce the plasmid inserts itself into the transfected cell nucleus, it codes for a peptide string of a foreign antigen. On its surface the cell displays the foreign antigen with both histocompatibility complex (MHC) classes I and class II molecules. The antigen-presenting cell then travels to the lymph nodes and presents the antigen peptide and costimulatory molecule signaled by T-cell, initiating the immune response.  Vaccine insert design Immunogens can be targeted to various cellular compartments to improve antibody or cytotoxic T-cell responses. Secreted or plasma membrane-bound antigens are more effective at inducing antibody responses than cytosolic antigens, while cytotoxic T-cell responses can be improved by targeting antigens for cytoplasmic degradation and subsequent entry into the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I pathway.  This is usually accomplished by the addition of N-terminal ubiquitin signals.  The conformation of the protein can also affect antibody responses. “Ordered” structures (such as viral particles) are more effective than unordered structures.    Strings of minigenes (or MHC class I epitopes) from different pathogens raise cytotoxic T-cell responses to some pathogens, especially if a TH epitope is also included.  Delivery  DNA vaccines have been introduced into animal tissues by multiple methods. Saline injectionThe two most popular approaches are injection of DNA in saline, using a standard hypodermic needle and gene gun delivery.    Injection in saline is normally conducted intramuscularly (IM) in skeletal muscle, or intradermally (ID), delivering DNA to extracellular spaces. This can be assisted by electroporation;    by temporarily damaging muscle fibres with myotoxins such as bupivacaine; or by using hypertonic solutions of saline or sucrose.  Immune responses to this method can be affected by factors including needle type,  needle alignment, speed of injection, volume of injection, muscle type, and age, sex and physiological condition of the recipient.  Gene gunGene gun delivery ballistically accelerates plasmid DNA (pDNA) that has been absorbed onto gold or tungsten microparticles into the target cells, using compressed helium as an accelerant.   DosageThe delivery method determines the dose required to raise an effective immune response. Saline injections require variable amounts of DNA, from 10 μg-1 mg, whereas gene gun deliveries require 100 to 1000 times.    Generally, 02 μg – 20 μg are required, although quantities as low as 16 ng have been reported.  These quantities vary by species. Mice for example, require approximately 10 times less DNA than primates.  Saline injections require more DNA because the DNA is delivered to the extracellular spaces of the target tissue (normally muscle), where it has to overcome physical barriers (such as the basal lamina and large amounts of connective tissue, to mention a few) before it is taken up by the cells, while gene gun deliveries bombard DNA directly into the cells, resulting in less “wastage”.   AlternativesAlternatives included aerosol instillation of naked DNA on mucosal surfaces, such as the nasal and lung mucosa,  and topical administration of pDNA to the eye    and vaginal mucosa.  Mucosal surface delivery has also been achieved using cationic liposome-DNA preparations,  biodegradable microspheres,attenuated Salmonalla,  Shigella or Listeria vectors for oral administration to the intestinal mucosa    and recombinant adenovirus vectors.  Another alternative vector is a hybrid vehicle composed of bacteria cell and synthetic polymers. Tested in mice, the hybrid vector was found to induce immune response.  Another approach to DNA vaccination is expression library immunization (ELI). Using this technique, potentially all the genes from a pathogen can be delivered at one time, which may be useful for pathogens that are difficult to attenuate or culture.  ELI can be used to identify which genes induce a protective response. This has been tested with Mycoplasma pulmonis, a murine lung pathogen with a relatively small genome. Advantages and disadvantages of commonly used DNA vaccine delivery methods Method of delivery Advantage Disadvantage  Intramuscular or Intradermal injection   No special delivery mechanism Permanent or semi-permanent expression pDNA spreads rapidly throughout the body    Inefficient site for uptake due to morphology of muscle tissue Relatively large amounts of DNA used Th1 response may not be the response required   Gene gun   DNA bombarded directly into cells Small amounts DNA    Th2 response may not be the response required Requires inert particles as carrier   Jet injection   No particles required DNA can be delivered to cells mm to cm below skin surface    Significant shearing of DNA after high-pressure expulsion 10-fold lower expression, and lower immune response Requires large amounts of DNA (up to 300 μg)   Liposome-mediated delivery   High levels of immune response can be generated Can increase transfection of intravenously delivered pDNA Intravenously delivered liposome-DNA complexes can potentially transfect all tissues Intranasally delivered liposome-DNA complexes can result in expression in distal mucosa as well as nasal muscosa and the generation of IgA antibodies    Toxicity Ineffectiveness in serum Risk of disease or immune reactions    Immune response  Helper T cell responses  DNA immunization can raise multiple T H  responses, including lymphoproliferation and the generation of a variety of cytokine profiles. A major advantage of DNA vaccines is the ease with which they can be manipulated to bias the type of T-cell help towards a TH1 or TH2 response.    Each type has distinctive patterns of lymphokine and chemokine expression, specific types of immunoglobulins, patterns of lymphocyte trafficking and types of innate immune responses. Other types of T-cell help The type of T-cell help raised is influenced by the delivery method and the type of immunogen expressed, as well as the targeting of different lymphoid compartmentsGenerally, saline needle injections (either IM or ID) tend to induce TH1 responses, while gene gun delivery raises TH2 responses.   This is true for intracellular and plasma membrane-bound antigens, but not for secreted antigens, which seem to generate TH2 responses, regardless of the method of delivery.   Generally the type of T-cell help raised is stable over time, and does not change when challenged or after subsequent immunizations that would normally have raised the opposite type of response in a naïve specimen. (1995)  immunized and boosted mice with pDNA encoding the circumsporozoite protein of the mouse malarial parasite Plasmodium yoelii (PyCSP) and found that the initial TH2 response changed, after boosting, to a TH1 response. Basis for different types of T-cell help How these different methods operate, the forms of antigen expressed, and the different profiles of T-cell help is not understood. It was thought that the relatively large amounts of DNA used in IM injection were responsible for the induction of TH1 responses. However, evidence shows no dose-related differences in TH type.  The type of T-cell help raised is determined by the differentiated state of antigen presenting cells. Dendritic cells can differentiate to secrete IL-12 (which supports TH1 cell development) or IL-4 (which supports TH2 responses).    pDNA injected by needle is endocytosed into the dendritic cell, which is then stimulated to differentiate for TH1 cytokine production,    while the gene gun bombards the DNA directly into the cell, thus bypassing TH1 stimulation. Practical uses of polarised T-cell help Polarisation in T-cell help is useful in influencing allergic responses and autoimmune diseases. In autoimmune diseases, the goal is to shift the self-destructive TH1 response (with its associated cytotoxic T cell activity) to a non-destructive TH2 response. This has been successfully applied in predisease priming for the desired type of response in preclinical models  and is somewhat successful in shifting the response for an established disease.    Cytotoxic T-cell responses One of the advantages of DNA vaccines is that they are able to induce cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) without the inherent risk associated with live vaccines. CTL responses can be raised against immunodominant and immunorecessive CTL epitopes,    as well as subdominant CTL epitopes,  in a manner that appears to mimic natural infection. This may prove to be a useful tool in assessing CTL epitopes and their role in providing immunityCytotoxic T-cells recognise small peptides (8-10 amino acids) complexed to MHC class I molecules. Restifo et al, 1995   These peptides are derived from endogenous cytosolic proteins that are degraded and delivered to the nascent MHC class I molecule within the endoplasmic reticulum (ER).    Targeting gene products directly to the ER (by the addition of an amino-terminal insertion sequence) should thus enhance CTL responses. This was successfully demonstrated using recombinant vaccinia viruses expressing influenza proteins,  but the principle should also be applicable to DNA vaccines. Targeting antigens for intracellular degradation (and thus entry into the MHC class I pathway) by the addition of ubiquitin signal sequences, or mutation of other signal sequences, was shown to be effective at increasing CTL responses. Kinetics of antibody response Humoral responses after a single DNA injection can be much longer-lived than after a single injection with a recombinant protein. Antibody responses against hepatitis B virus (HBV) envelope protein (HBsAg) have been sustained for up to 74 weeks without boost, while lifelong maintenance of protective response to influenza haemagglutinin was demonstrated in mice after gene gun delivery.    Antibody-secreting cells migrate to the bone marrow and spleen for long-term antibody production, and generally localise there after one year. DNA-raised antibody responses rise much more slowly than when natural infection or recombinant protein immunization occurs. As many as 12 weeks may be required to reach peak titres in mice, although boosting can decrease the interval. This response is probably due to the low levels of antigen expressed over several weeks, which supports both primary and secondary phases of antibody response. DNA vaccine expressing HBV small and middle envelope protein was injected into adults with chronic hepatitis. The vaccine resulted in specific interferon gamma cell production. Also specific T-cells for middle envelop proteins antigens were developed. Comparison of T-dependent antibody responses raise by DNA immunisations, protein inoculations and viral infections    Method of Immunization  DNA vaccine Recombinant protein Natural infection  Amount of inducing antigen ng μg ? (ng-μg)  Duration of antigen presentation several weeksthese cells were thought to be unique because of their extensive network of T-tubules. Using electron microscopy, it was proposed that DNA uptake was facilitated by caveolae (or, non-clathrin coated pits).    However, subsequent research revealed that other cells (such as keratinocytes, fibroblasts and epithelial Langerhans cells) could also internalize DNAThe mechanism of DNA uptake is not knownTwo theories dominate – that in vivo uptake of DNA occurs non-specifically, in a method similar to phago- or pinocytosis,  or through specific receptors.    These might include a 30kDa surface receptor, or macrophage scavenger receptors. The 30kDa surface receptor binds specifically to 4500-bp DNA fragments (which are then internalised) and is found on professional APCs and T-cells. Macrophage scavenger receptors bind to a variety of macromolecules, including polyribonucleotides and are thus candidates for DNA uptakeReceptor-mediated DNA uptake could be facilitated by the presence of polyguanylate sequences. Antigen presentation by bone marrow-derived cells Studies using chimeric mice have shown that antigen is presented by bone-marrow derived cells, which include dendritic cells, macrophages and specialised B-cells called professional antigen presenting cells (APC)After gene gun inoculation to the skin, transfected Langerhans cells migrate to the draining lymph node to present antigens.  After IM and ID injections, dendritic cells present antigen in the draining lymph node  and transfected macrophages have been found in the peripheral blood.   Besides direct transfection of dendritic cells or macrophages, cross priming occurs following IM, ID and gene gun DNA deliveries. This can prime cytotoxic T-cell responses and seems to be important for a full primary immune responseTarget site role IM and ID DNA delivery initiate immune responses differently. In the skin, keratinocytes, fibroblasts and Langerhans cells take up and express antigens and are responsible for inducing a primary antibody response. Transfected Langerhans cells migrate out of the skin (within 12 hours) to the draining lymph node where they prime secondary B- and T-cell responses. In skeletal muscle striated muscle cells are most frequently transfected, but seem to be unimportant in immune response. Instead, IM inoculated DNA “washes” into the draining lymph node within minutes, where distal dendritic cells are transfected and then initiate an immune response. Transfected myocytes seem to act as a “reservoir” of antigen for trafficking professional APCs.    Maintenance of immune responseDNA vaccination generates an effective immune memory via the display of antigen-antibody complexes on follicular dendritic cells (FDC), which are potent B-cell stimulators. T-cells can be stimulated by similar, germinal centre dendritic cells. FDC are able to generate an immune memory because antibodies production “overlaps” long-term expression of antigen, allowing antigen-antibody immunocomplexes to form and be displayed by FDC.  Interferons Both helper and cytotoxic T-cells can control viral infections by secreting interferons. Cytotoxic T cells usually kill virally infected cells. However, they can also be stimulated to secrete antiviral cytokines such as IFN-γ and TNF-α, which do not kill the cell, but limit viral infection by down-regulating the expression of viral components.    DNA vaccinations can be used to curb viral infections by non-destructive IFN-mediated control.    IFN-γ is critically important in controlling malaria infections    and is a consideration for anti-malarial DNA vaccines. Immune response modulation  Cytokine modulation An effective vaccine must induce an appropriate immune response for a given pathogen. DNA vaccines can polarise T-cell help towards TH1 or TH2 profiles and generate CTL and/or antibody when required. These “genetic adjuvants” can be administered as a:  mixture of 2 plasmids, one encoding the immunogen and the other encoding the cytokine single bi- or polycistronic vector, separated by spacer regions plasmid-encoded chimera, or fusion protein In general, co-administration of pro-inflammatory agents (such as various interleukins, tumor necrosis factor, and GM-CSF) plus TH2-inducing cytokines increase antibody responses, whereas pro-inflammatory agents and TH1-inducing cytokines decrease humoral responses and increase cytotoxic responses (more important in viral protection).  Plasmid encoding B7-1 (a ligand on APCs) successfully enhanced the immune response in tumour models. It was proposed that GM-CSF caused dendritic cells to present antigen more efficiently and enhance IL-2 production and TH cell activation, thus driving the increased immune response.  This can be further enhanced by first priming with a pPyCSP and pGM-CSF mixture, followed by boosting with a recombinant poxvirus expressing PyCSP. The advantages of genetic adjuvants are their low cost and simple administration, as well as avoidance of unstable recombinant cytokines and potentially toxic, “conventional” adjuvants (such as alum, calcium phosphate, monophosphoryl lipid A, cholera toxin, cationic and mannan-coated liposomes, QS21, carboxymethyl cellulose and ubenimix).   However, the potential toxicity of prolonged cytokine expression is not  established. In many commercially important animal species, cytokine genes have not been identified and isolated. In addition, various plasmid-encoded cytokines modulate the immune system differently according to the delivery time. For example, some cytokine plasmid DNAs are best delivered after immunogen pDNA, because pre- or co-delivery can decrease specific responses and increase non-specific responses.    Immunostimulatory CpG motifs Plasmid DNA itself appears to have an adjuvant effect on the immune system.   Bacterially derived DNA can trigger innate immune defence mechanisms, the activation of dendritic cells and the production of TH1 cytokinesThis is due to recognition of certain CpG dinucleotide sequences that are immunostimulatoryCpG stimulatory (CpG-S) sequences occur twenty times more frequently in bacterially-derived DNA than in eukaryotes. CpG dinucleotide pairs occur much less frequently than expected. Additionally, CpG-S sequences are hypomethylated. This occurs frequently in bacterial DNA, while CpG motifs occurring in eukaryotes are methylated at the cytosine nucleotide. In contrast, nucleotide sequences that inhibit the activation of an immune response (termed CpG neutralising, or CpG-N) are over represented in eukaryotic genomes.    The optimal immunostimulatory sequence is an unmethylated CpG dinucleotide flanked by two 5’ purines and two 3’ pyrimidines.   Additionally, flanking regions outside this immunostimulatory hexamer must be guanine-rich to ensure binding and uptake into target cellsThe innate system works with the adaptive immune system to mount a response against the DNA encoded protein. CpG-S sequences induce polyclonal B-cell activation and the upregulation of cytokine expression and secretion.    Stimulated macrophages secrete IL-12, IL-18, TNF-α, IFN-α, IFN-β and IFN-γ, while stimulated B-cells secrete IL-6 and some IL-12Manipulation of CpG-S and CpG-N sequences in the plasmid backbone of DNA vaccines can ensure the success of the immune response to the encoded antigen and drive the immune response toward a TH1 phenotype. This is useful if a pathogen requires a TH response for protection. CpG-S sequences have also been used as external adjuvants for both DNA and recombinant protein vaccination with variable success rates. Other organisms with hypomethylated CpG motifs have demonstrated the stimulation of polyclonal B-cell expansion.   The mechanism behind this may be more complicated than simple methylation – hypomethylated murine DNA has not been found to mount an immune responseMost of the evidence for immunostimulatory CpG sequences comes from murine studies. Extrapolation of this data to other species requires caution – individual species may require different flanking sequences, as binding specificities of scavenger receptors vary across species. Additionally, species such as ruminants may be insensitive to immunostimulatory sequences due to their large gastrointestinal load. Alternative boosts DNA-primed immune responses can be boosted by the administration of recombinant protein or recombinant poxviruses. "Prime-boost" strategies with recombinant protein have successfully increased both neutralising antibody titre, and antibody avidity and persistence, for weak immunogens, such as HIV-1 envelope proteinRecombinant virus boosts have been shown to be very efficient at boosting DNA-primed CTL responses. Priming with DNA focuses the immune response on the required immunogen, while boosting with the recombinant virus provides a larger amount of expressed antigen, leading to a large increase in specific CTL responsesPrime-boost strategies have been successful in inducing protection against malarial challenge in a number of studies. Primed mice with plasmid DNA encoding Plasmodium yoelii circumsporozoite surface protein (PyCSP), then boosted with a recombinant vaccinia virus expressing the same protein had significantly higher levels of antibody, CTL activity and IFN-γ, and hence higher levels of protection, than mice immunized and boosted with plasmid DNA alone.    This can be further enhanced by priming with a mixture of plasmids encoding PyCSP and murine GM-CSF, before boosting with recombinant vaccinia virus. Immunized monkeys developed antibodies against sporozoites and infected erythrocytes, and IFN-γ-secreting T-cell responses against peptides from PkCSP. Partial protection against sporozoite challenge was achieved, and mean parasitemia was significantly reduced, compared to control monkeys. Enhancing immune responses  DNA The efficiency of DNA immunization can be improved by stabilising DNA against degradation, and increasing the efficiency of delivery of DNA into antigen-presenting cells.  This has been demonstrated by coating biodegradable cationic microparticles (such as poly(lactide-co-glycolide) formulated with cetyltrimethylammonium bromide) with DNA. Such DNA-coated microparticles can be as effective at raising CTL as recombinant viruses, especially when mixed with alum. Particles 300 nm in diameter appear to be most efficient for uptake by antigen presenting cells.  Alphavirus vectors Recombinant alphavirus-based vectors have been used to improve DNA vaccination efficiency.  The gene encoding the antigen of interest is inserted into the alphavirus replicon, replacing structural genes but leaving non-structural replicase genes intact. The Sindbis virus and Semliki Forest virus have been used to build recombinant alphavirus replicons. Unlike conventional DNA vaccinations alphavirus vectors kill transfected cells and are only transiently expressed. Alphavirus replicase genes are expressed in addition to the vaccine insert. It is not clear how alphavirus replicons raise an immune response, but it may be due to the high levels of protein expressed by this vector, replicon-induced cytokine responses, or replicon-induced apoptosis leading to enhanced antigen uptake by dendritic cells. See also   Vector DNA HIV vaccine   References   External links  PowderMed pdf report DyNAVacS, an Integrative Tool for Optimised DNA Vaccine Design from the Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology. 

Southern Schleswig<====>45575<====>Southern Schleswig    Southern Schleswig (  or  ,  ) is the southern half of the former Duchy of Schleswig   in Germany on the Jutland Peninsula. The geographical area today covers the large area between the Eider river in the south and the Flensburg Fjord in the north,  where it borders Denmark. Northern Schleswig, congruent with the former South Jutland County, forms the southernmost part of Denmark. Denmark wanted to give away the German speaking Holsten and set the new border at the small river Ejderen. Prussian chancellor Otto von Bismarck concluded that this justified a war, and even proclaimed it as a "holy war". The German chancellor also turned to the Emperor of Austria, Franz Joseph I of Austria for help. A similar war in 1848 had gone poorly for the Prussians. With help from both the Austrians and the Danish-born General Moltke, the Danish army was destroyed or forced to make a disorderly retreat. And the Prussian-Danish border was moved from the Elbe up in Jutland to the creek  After the First World War, two referendums decided a new border.   The northern part reverted to Denmark as   (North Slesvig). But the middle and southern part, including Schleswig's only city, Flensburg, remained in what, since the unification of Germany, had become German hands.  HistoryThe Schleswig lands north of the Eider river and the Bay of Kiel had been a fief of the Danish Crown since the Early Middle Ages. The southern Holstein region belonged to Francia and later to the Holy Roman Empire, but it was held as an imperial fief by the Danish kings since the 1460 Treaty of Ribe. The Schleswig-Holstein Question was first brought to a head during the Revolutions of 1848, when, from 1848 to 1851, revolting German-speaking National liberals backed by Prussia fought for the separation of Schleswig and Holstein from Denmark in the First Schleswig War. Though the status quo ante bellum was restored, the conflict lingered on, and on 1 February 1864 Prussian and Austrian troops crossed the Eider, sparking off the Second Schleswig War, after which Denmark had to cede Schleswig and Holstein according to the Treaty of Vienna. After the Austro-Prussian War of 1866, victorious Prussia took control over all Schleswig and Holstein but was obliged by the Peace of Prague to hold a referendum in predominantly Danish-speaking Northern Schleswig, which it never did. After the German defeat in World War I, the Schleswig Plebiscites were decreed by the 1919 Treaty of Versailles, in which the present-day German-Danish border was drawn. The border took effect on 15 June 1920, dividing Schleswig into a southern and northern part and leaving a considerable Danish and German minority on both sides. It does not, however, form an administrative entity, but instead consists of the districts ( ) of Schleswig-Flensburg, Nordfriesland, the urban district ( ) of Flensburg and the northern part of Rendsburg-Eckernförde. Besides Standard German, Low Saxon dialects (Schleswigsch) are spoken, as well as Danish (Standard Danish or South Schleswig Danish) and its South Jutlandic variant, plus North Frisian in the west.  Danish and North Frisian are official minority languages. Many of the inhabitants who speak only German and not Danish do not consider the region any different from the rest of Schleswig-Holstein. This notion is disputed by those defining themselves as Danes, South Schleswigans or Schleswigans, particularly historians and people organised in the institutions of the Danish minority of Southern Schleswig, such as the South Schleswig Voter Federation. Many of the last names found in the region are very often of Scandinavian or Danish form, with the -sen endings like PetersenThe major cities of Southern Schleswig are Flensburg, Rendsburg, the city of Schleswig, and Husum. 


      
